<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en"><body>
<div class="front">
<div class="div1 frenchtitle"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first xd21e116">THE LUZUMIYAT OF ABU’L-ALA
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e118" id="xd21e118" class="pginternal">3</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1 dedication"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first xd21e116">TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS<br/>
<b>EMIR FEISAL</b><br/>
IN WHOM ARE CENTRED<br/>
THE HOPES AND ASPIRATIONS<br/>
OF THE SYRIAN PEOPLE<br/>
FOR A UNITED SYRIA<br/>
THIS BOOK<br/>
IS DEDICATED <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e139" id="xd21e139" class="pginternal">5</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e178" id="xd21e178" class="pginternal">6</a>]</span></p>
<div class="div1 review"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
</div>
<div class="div1 dedication" id="dedication2"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main">TO ABU’L-ALA</h2>
<div class="lgouter">
<div class="lg">
<p class="line">In thy fountained peristyles of Reason</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Glows the light and flame of desert noons;</p>
<p class="line">And in the cloister of thy pensive Fancy</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Wisdom burns the spikenard of her moons.</p>
</div>
<div class="lg">
<p class="line">Closed by Fate the portals of the dwelling</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Of thy sight, the light thus inward
flowed;</p>
<p class="line">And on the shoulders of the crouching Darkness</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Thou hast risen to the highest road.</p>
</div>
<div class="lg">
<p class="line">I have seen thee walking with Canopus</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Through the stellar spaces of the night;</p>
<p class="line">I have heard thee asking thy Companion,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">“Where be now my staff, and where thy
light?”</p>
</div>
<div class="lg">
<p class="line">Abu’l-Ala, in the heaving darkness,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Didst thou not the whisperings hear of me?</p>
<p class="line">In thy star-lit wilderness, my Brother,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Didst thou not a burdened shadow see?</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e235" id="xd21e235" class="pginternal">8</a>]</span></p>
<div class="lg">
<p class="line">I have walked and I have slept beside thee,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">I have laughed and I have wept as well;</p>
<p class="line">I have heard the voices of thy silence</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Melting in thy Jannat and thy hell.</p>
</div>
<div class="lg">
<p class="line">I remember, too, that once the Saki</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Filled the antique cup and gave it thee;</p>
<p class="line">Now, filled with the treasures of thy wisdom,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Thou dost pass that very cup to me.</p>
</div>
<div class="lg">
<p class="line">By the God of thee, my Syrian Brother,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Which is best, the Saki’s cup or
thine?</p>
<p class="line">Which the mystery divine uncovers—</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">If the cover covers aught divine.</p>
</div>
<div class="lg">
<p class="line">And if it lies hid in the soul of silence</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Like incense in the dust of ambergris,</p>
<p class="line">Wouldst thou burn it to perfume the terror</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Of the caverns of the dried-up seas?</p>
</div>
<div class="lg">
<p class="line">Where’er it be, Oh! let it be, my
Brother.—</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Though
“thrice-imprisoned,”<a class="pseudonoteref pginternal" href="#note.i">9</a> thou hast forged us more</p>
<p class="line">Solid weapons for the life-long battle</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Than all the Heaven-taught Armorers of
yore.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e284" id="xd21e284" class="pginternal">9</a>]</span></p>
<div class="lg">
<p class="line">“Thrice-imprisoned,” thou wert e’en
as mighty,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">In the boundless kingdom of the mind,</p>
<p class="line">As the whirlwind that compels the ocean,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">As the thunder that compels the wind.</p>
</div>
<div class="lg">
<p class="line">“Thrice-imprisoned,” thou wert freer
truly</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Than the liegeless Arab on his
mare,—</p>
<p class="line">Freer than the bearers of the sceptre,—</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Freer than the winged lords of the air.</p>
</div>
<div class="lg">
<p class="line">“Thrice-imprisoned,” thou hast sung of
freedom</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">As but a few of all her heroes can;</p>
<p class="line">Thou hast undermined the triple prison</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Of the mind and heart and soul of man.</p>
</div>
<div class="lg">
<p class="line">In thy fountained peristyles of Reason</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Glows the light and flame of desert noons;</p>
<p class="line">And in the cloister of thy pensive Fancy</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Wisdom burns the spikenard of her moons.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first signed"><i>Ameen Rihani.</i> <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e326" id="xd21e326" class="pginternal">11</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1 preface" id="preface"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main">PREFACE.</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">When Christendom was groping amid the
superstitions of the Dark Ages, and the Norsemen were ravaging the
western part of Europe, and the princes of Islam were cutting each
other’s throats in the name of Allah and his Prophet,
Abu’l-Ala’l-Ma’arri was waging his bloodless war
against the follies and evils of his age. He attacked the superstitions
and false traditions of law and religion, proclaiming the supremacy of
the mind; he hurled his trenchant invectives at the tyranny, the
bigotry, and the quackery of his times, asserting the supremacy of the
soul; he held the standard of reason high above that of authority,
fighting to the end the battle of the human intellect. An intransigeant
with the exquisite mind of a sage and scholar, his weapons were never
idle. But he was, above all, a poet; for when he stood before the
eternal mystery of Life and Death, he sheathed his sword and murmured a
prayer.</p>
<p class="par">Abu’l-Ala’l-Ma’arri,<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e334" id="xd21e334src">1</a> the
Lucretius of Islam, the Voltaire of the East, was born in the spring of
the year 973 A.D., in the obscure village of Ma’arrah,<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e346" id="xd21e346src">2</a>
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e349" id="xd21e349" class="pginternal">12</a>]</span>which is about eighteen hours’ journey
south of Halab (Aleppo). And instead of Ahmad ibn Abdallah ibn Sulaiman
ut-Tanukhi (of the tribe of Tanukh), he was called Abu’l-Ala (the
Father of the Sublime), by which patronymic of distinction he is
popularly known throughout the Arabic speaking world.</p>
<p class="par">When a boy, Abu’l-Ala was instructed by his
father; and subsequently he was sent to Halab, where he pursued his
studies under the tutelage of the grammarian Muhammad ibn Abdallah ibn
us-Sad. His literary proclivity was evinced in his boyhood, and he
wrote verse, we are told, before he was ten. Of these juvenile pieces,
however, nothing was preserved.</p>
<p class="par">He was about five years old when he fell a victim to
small-pox and almost lost his sight from it. But a weakness in his eyes
continued to trouble him and he became, in middle age, I presume,
totally blind.<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e355" id="xd21e355src">3</a> Some of his biographers would have us believe
he was born blind; others state that he completely lost his sight when
he was attacked by the virulent disease; and a few intimate that he
could see slightly at least with the right eye. As to whether or not he
was blind when he was sent to Halab to pursue his studies, his
biographers do not agree. My theory, based on the careful perusal of
his poems and on a statement advanced by one of his
biographers,<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e363" id="xd21e363src">4</a> is that <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e366" id="xd21e366" class="pginternal">13</a>]</span>he lost his sight
gradually, and total blindness must have come upon him either in his
youth or his middle age.<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e368" id="xd21e368src">5</a> Were we to believe that he was
born blind or that he suffered the complete loss of his sight in his
boyhood, we should be at a loss to know, not how he wrote his books,
for that was done by dictation; not how he taught his pupils, for that
was done by lectures; but how he himself was taught in the absence in
those days of a regular system of instruction for the blind.</p>
<p class="par">In 1010 A.D. he visited Baghdad, the centre of learning
and intelligence and the capital of the Abbaside Khalifs, where he
passed about two years and became acquainted with most of the literary
men of the age.<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e382" id="xd21e382src">6</a> He attended the lectures and the readings of
the leading doctors and grammarians, meeting with a civil reception at
the hand of most of them.</p>
<p class="par">He also journeyed to Tripoli,<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e405" id="xd21e405src">7</a> which boasted,
in those days, of many public libraries; and, stopping at Ladhekiyah,
he lodged in a monastery where he met and befriended a very learned
monk. They discussed theology and metaphysics, <span class="corr" title="Source: disgressing" id="xd21e408">digressing</span> now and then
into the profane. Indeed, the skepticism which permeates
Abu’l-Ala’s writings must have been nursed in that convent
by both the monk and the poet. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e411" id="xd21e411" class="pginternal">14</a>]</span></p>
<p class="par">These are virtually the only data extant showing the
various sources of Abu’l-Ala’s learning; but to one endowed
with a keen perception, a powerful intellect, a prodigious memory,
together with strong innate literary predilections, they seem
sufficient. He was especially noted for the extraordinary memory he
possessed; and around this our Arab biographers and historians weave a
thick net of anecdotes, or rather fables. I have no doubt that one with
such a prodigious memory could retain in a few minutes what the average
person could not; but when we are told that Abu’l-Ala once heard
one of his pupils speaking with a friend in a foreign tongue, and
repeated there and then the long conversation, word for word, without
having the slightest idea of its meaning, we are disposed to be
skeptical. Many such anecdotes are recorded and quoted by his Arab
biographers without as much as intimating a single doubt.<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e414" id="xd21e414src">8</a>
The fact that he was blind partly explains the abnormal development of
his memory.</p>
<p class="par">His career as poet and scholar dates from the time he
returned from Baghdad. This, so far as is known, was the last journey
he made; and his home became henceforth his earthly prison. He calls
himself “A double-fettered Captive,”<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#note.i" id="note.isrc">9</a> his solitude being
the one and his blindness the other. Like most of the <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e434" id="xd21e434" class="pginternal">15</a>]</span>scholars of his age, in the absence of regular
educational institutions, with perhaps one or two exceptions, he had to
devote a part of his time to the large number of pupils that flocked to
Ma’arrah from all parts of Asia Minor, Arabia, and India. Aside
from this, he dictated to his numerous amanuenses on every possible and
known subject. He is not only a poet of the first rank, but an
essayist, a literary critic, and a mathematician as well. Everything he
wrote was transcribed by many of his admirers, as was the fashion then,
and thus circulated far and near. Nothing, however, was preserved but
his Diwans, his Letters and the Epistle of Forgiveness,<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e436" id="xd21e436src">10</a>
of which I shall yet have occasion to speak.<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e439" id="xd21e439src">11</a></p>
<p class="par">His reputation as poet and scholar had now, after his
return from Baghdad, overleaped the horizons, as one writer has it.
Honors were conferred upon him successively by the rulers and the
scholars of his age. His many noted admirers were in constant
communication with him. He was now looked upon as “the master of
the learned, the chief of the wise, and the sole monarch of the bards
of his century.” Ma’arrah<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e446" id="xd21e446src">12</a> became the
Mecca of every literary aspirant; ambitious young scholars came there
for <span class="corr" title="Source: enlightment" id="xd21e449">enlightenment</span> and inspiration. And
Abu’l-Ala, although a pessimist, received them with his wonted
kindness <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e452" id="xd21e452" class="pginternal">16</a>]</span>and courtesy. He imparted to them what he
knew, and told them candidly what he would not teach, since, unlike
other philosophers, he was not able to grasp the truth, nor compass the
smallest of the mysteries of creation. In his latter days, youthful
admirers sought his blessing, which he, as the childless father of all,
graciously conferred, but with no self-assumed spiritual or temporal
authority.</p>
<p class="par">For thirty years he remained a vegetarian, living the
life of an ascetic.<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e456" id="xd21e456src">13</a> This mode of living led his enemies to accuse
him of renouncing Islam and embracing Brahminism, one of the tenets of
which forbids the slaughter of animals. The accusation was rather
sustained by the dispassionate attitude he held towards it, and,
furthermore, by his vehement denunciation of the barbarous practice of
killing animals for food or for sport.</p>
<p class="par">Most of the censors of Abu’l-Ala were either
spurred to their task by bigotry or animated by jealousy and ignorance.
They held him up to ridicule and opprobrium, and such epithets as
heretic, atheist, renegade, etc., were freely applied. But he was
supremely indifferent to them all,<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e462" id="xd21e462src">14</a> and never would he cross
swords with any particular individual; he attacked the false doctrines
they were teaching, turning a deaf ear to the virulent vituperations
they hurled upon him. I fail to find in the <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e474" id="xd21e474" class="pginternal">17</a>]</span>three volumes of his poems, even in the
Letters, one acrimonious line savoring of personality.</p>
<p class="par">Ibn-Khillikan, The Plutarch of Arabia, who is cautious
and guarded in his statements, speaking of Abu’l-Ala, truly
says:</p>
<p class="par">“His asceticism, his deep sense of right and
wrong, his powerful intellect, his prodigious memory, and his wide
range of learning, are alike acknowledged by both friend and
foe.”</p>
<p class="par">His pessimism was natural, in part hereditary. The man
was nothing if not genuine and sincere. Ruthlessly he said what he
thought and felt. He had no secrets to hide from the world, no thoughts
which he dared not express. His soul was as open as Nature; his mind
was the polished mirror of his age.<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e482" id="xd21e482src">15</a> It may be that had he not
been blind-stricken and had not small-pox disfigured his features, he
might have found a palliative in human society. His pessimism might not
have been cured, but it might have been rendered at least enticing.
Good-fellowship might have robbed it of its sting. Nor is his strong
aversion to marriage, in view of these facts, surprising.</p>
<p class="par">He lived to know that “his fame spread from the
sequestered village of Ma’arrah to the utmost confines of the
Arabic speaking world.” In the spring of 1055 A.D. he died, and
was buried in a <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e487" id="xd21e487" class="pginternal">18</a>]</span>garden surrounding his home.
Adh-Dhahabi states that there were present at his grave eighty poets,
and that the Koran was read there two hundred times in a fortnight.
Eighty poets in the small town of Ma’arrah sounds incredible. But
we must bear in mind that almost every one who studies the Arabic
grammar has also to study prosody and versification and thus become at
least a rhymster. Even to-day, the death of a noted person among the
Arabs, is always an occasion for the display of much eloquence and
tears, both in prose and verse.</p>
<p class="par">Abu’l-Ala, beside being a poet and scholar of the
first rank, was also one of the foremost thinkers of his age. Very
little is said of his teachings, his characteristics, his many-sided
intellect, in the biographies I have read. The fact that he was a
liberal thinker, a trenchant writer,—free, candid, downright,
independent, skeptical withal,—answers for the neglect on the
part of Mohammedan doctors, who, when they do discuss him, try to
conceal from the world what his poems unquestionably reveal. I am
speaking, of course, of the neglect after his death. For during his
life-time he was much honored, as I have shown, and many distinguished
travellers came especially to Ma’arrah to see him. He was also
often called upon to act as intercessor with the Emirs for the natives
of his village.<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e491" id="xd21e491src">16</a> <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e494" id="xd21e494" class="pginternal">19</a>]</span></p>
<p class="par">The larger collection of his poems, the
Luzumiyat,<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e497" id="xd21e497src">17</a> was published in Cairo, in two volumes, by Azeez
Zind, from an original Ms. written in the twelfth century, under
Abu’l-Ala’s own title <i data-invalid-lang="ar-latn">Luzum ma la
Yalzam</i>, or the Necessity of what is Unnecessary. This title refers
to the special system of rhyming which the poet adopted. And the poems,
published in desultory fashion, were written, it seems, at different
periods of his life, and are arranged according to his particular
alphabetical system of rhyming. They bear no titles except, “And
he also says, rhyming with so and so,” whatever the consonant and
vowel may be. In his Preface to the Luzumiyat he says:</p>
<p class="par">“It happened that I composed these poems during
the past years, and in them I have always aimed at the truth. They are
certainly free from the blandishments of exaggeration. And while some
of them are written in glorification of God, who is above such glory,
others are, as it were, a reminder to those who forget, a pinch to
those who sleep, and a warning to the children of the earth against the
wiles of the great world, where human rights and human gratitude are
often strangled by the same hand of Fate.”</p>
<p class="par">As for the translation of these chosen quatrains, let me
say at the outset that it is almost impossible <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e507" id="xd21e507" class="pginternal">20</a>]</span>to adhere to the letter thereof and convey the
meaning without being insipid, dull, and at times even ridiculous.
There being no affinity between the Arabic and the English, their
standards of art and beauty widely differ, and in the process of
transformation the outer garment at times must necessarily be doffed. I
have always adhered to the spirit, however, preserving the native
imagery where it was not too clannish or grotesque. I have added
nothing that was foreign to the ruling idea, nor have I omitted
anything that was necessary to the completion of the general thought.
One might get an idea of what is called a scholarly translation from
the works of any of the Orientalists who have made a study of
Abu’l-Ala. The first English scholar to mention the poet, as far
as I know, was J. D. Carlisle, who in his “Specimens of Arabic
Poetry”, published in 1810, has paraphrased in verse a quatrain
on Pride and Virtue. He also translated into Latin one of
Abu’l-Ala’s bold epigrams, fearing, I suppose, to publish
it at that time in English.</p>
<p class="par">The quatrains which are here published are culled from
the three Volumes of his poems, and they are arranged, as nearly as may
be, in the logical order of their sequence of thought. They form a kind
of eclogue, which the poet-philosopher delivers from his prison in
Ma’arrah. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e511" id="xd21e511" class="pginternal">21</a>]</span></p>
<p class="par">Once, in Damascus, I visited, with some friends, a
distinguished Sufi; and when the tea was being served, our host held
forth on the subject of Abu’l-Ala’s creed. He quoted from
the Luzumiyat to show that the poet-philosopher of Ma’arrah was a
true Sufi, and of the highest order. “In his passionate hatred of
the vile world and all the vile material manifestations of life,”
quoth our host, “he was like a dervish dancing in sheer
bewilderment; a holy man, indeed, melting in tears before the distorted
image of Divinity. In his aloofness, as in the purity of his spirit,
the ecstatic negations of Abu’l-Ala can only be translated in
terms of the Sufi’s creed. In his raptures, <i data-invalid-lang="ar-latn">shathat</i>, he was as distant as Ibn ul-Arabi; and in his
bewilderment, <i data-invalid-lang="ar-latn">heirat</i>, he was as deeply
intoxicated as Ibn ul-Fared. If others have symbolized the Divinity in
wine, he symbolized it in Reason, which is the living oracle of the
Soul; he has, in a word, embraced Divinity under the cover of a
philosophy of extinction.”...</p>
<p class="par">This, and more such from our Sufi host, to which the
guests gently nodded understanding. One of them, a young poet and
scholar, even added that most of the irreligious opinions that are
found in the Luzumiyat were forced upon the poet by the rigorous system
of rhyming he adopted. The Rhyme, <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e523" id="xd21e523" class="pginternal">22</a>]</span>then, is
responsible for the heresies of Abu’l-Ala! Allah be praised! But
this view of the matter was not new to me. I have heard it expressed by
zealous Muslem scholars, who see in Abu’l-Ala an adversary too
strong to be allowed to enlist with the enemy. They will keep him, as
one of the “Pillars of the Faith,” at any cost. Coming from
them, therefore, this rhyme-begotten heresy theory is not
surprising.</p>
<p class="par">But I am surprised to find a European scholar like
Professor Margoliouth giving countenance to such views; even repeating,
to support his own argument,<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e527" id="xd21e527src">18</a> such drivel. For if the system of
rhyme-ending imposes upon the poet his irreligious opinions, how can we
account for them in his prose writings? How, for instance, explain his
book “<i data-invalid-lang="ar-latn">Al-fusul wal Ghayat</i><span class="corr" title="Not in source" id="xd21e532">”</span> (The Chapters and
the Purposes), a work in which he parodied the Koran itself, and which
only needed, as he said, to bring it to the standard of the Book,
“the polishing of four centuries of reading in the pulpit?”
And how account for his “<i data-invalid-lang="ar-latn">Risalat
ul-Ghufran</i>” (Epistle of Forgiveness), a most remarkable work
both in form and conception?—a Divina Comedia in its cotyledonous
state, as it were, only that Abu’l-Ala does not seem to have
relished the idea of visiting Juhannam. He must have felt that in his
“three earthly prisons” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e538" id="xd21e538" class="pginternal">23</a>]</span>he had had
enough of it. So he visits the Jannat and there meets the pagan bards
of Arabia lulling themselves in eternal bliss under the eternal shades
of the <i data-invalid-lang="ar-latn">sidr</i> tree, writing and reading and
discussing poetry. Now, to people the Muslem’s Paradise with
heathen poets who have been forgiven,—hence the title of the
Work,—and received among the blest,—is not this clear
enough, bold enough, loud enough even for the deaf and the blind?
“The idea,” says Professor Nicholson, speaking of The
Epistle of Forgiveness,<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e544" id="xd21e544src">19</a> “is carried out with such
ingenuity and in a spirit of audacious burlesque that reminds one of
Lucien.”</p>
<p class="par">This does not mean, however, that the work is
essentially of a burlesque quality. Abu’l-Ala had humor; but his
earnest tone is never so little at an ebb as when he is in his happiest
mood. I quote from The Epistle of Forgiveness:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="par first">“Sometimes you may find a man skilful in his
trade,” says the Author, “perfect in sagacity and in the
use of arguments, but when he comes to religion he is found obstinate,
so does he follow in the old groove. Piety is implanted in human
nature; it is deemed a sure refuge. To the growing child, that which
falls from his elders’ lips is a lesson that abides with him all
his life. Monks in their cloisters and devotees in their mosques accept
their creed just as a story is handed down from him who tells it,
without distinguishing between a true interpreter and a <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e552" id="xd21e552" class="pginternal">24</a>]</span>false. If one of these had found his kin among
the Magians, or among the Sabians, he would have become nearly or quite
like them.”</p>
</div>
<p class="par"/>
<p class="par">It does seem, too, that the strain of heterodoxy in
Abu’l-Ala is partly hereditary. His father, who was also a poet
of some distinction, and his maternal uncle, were both noted for their
liberal opinions in religious matters. And he himself, alluding in one
of his poems to those who reproached him for not making the pilgrimage
to Mecca, says that neither his father, nor his cousin, nor his uncle
had pilgrimaged at all, and that he will not be denied forgiveness, if
they are forgiven. And if they are not, he had as lief share their
fate.</p>
<p class="par">But aside from his prose writings, in which, do what we
may, we can not explain away his supposed heresies, we find in the
Luzumiyat themselves his dominant ideas on religion, for instance,
being a superstition; wine, an unmitigated evil; virtue, its own
reward; the cremation of the dead, a virtue; the slaughter or even the
torture of animals a crime;<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e559" id="xd21e559src">20</a> doubt, a way to truth; reason,
the only prophet and guide;—we find these ideas clothed in
various images and expressed in varied forms, but unmistakable in
whatever guise we find them. Here, for instance, is Professor
Nicholson’s almost literal translation of a quatrain from the
Luzumiyat: <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e562" id="xd21e562" class="pginternal">25</a>]</span></p>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Hanifs<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e566" id="xd21e566src">21</a> are stumbling, Christians gone
astray,</p>
<p class="line">Jews wildered, Magians far on error’s
way:—</p>
<p class="line">We mortals are composed of two great schools,</p>
<p class="line">Enlightened knaves or else religious fools.</p>
</div>
<p class="par first">And here is the same idea, done in a large
picture. The translation, literal too, is mine:</p>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">’Tis strange that Kusrah and his people wash</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Their faces in the staling of the kine;</p>
<p class="line">And that the Christians say, Almighty God</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Was tortured, mocked, and crucified in
fine:</p>
<p class="line">And that the Jews should picture Him as one</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Who loves the odor of a roasting chine;</p>
<p class="line">And stranger still that Muslems travel far</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">To kiss a black stone said to be
divine:—</p>
<p class="line">Almighty God! will all the human race</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Stray blindly from the Truth’s most
sacred shrine?<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e601" id="xd21e601src">22</a></p>
</div>
<p class="par first">The East still remains the battle-ground of the
creeds. And the Europeans, though they shook off <i>their</i> fetters
of moral and spiritual slavery, would keep us in ours to facilitate the
conquests of European commence. Thus the terrible Dragon, which is fed
by the foreign missionary and the native priest, by the theologians and
the ulama, and which still preys upon the heart and mind of Orient
nations, is as active to-day as it was ten centuries ago. Let those
consider this, who think Von Kremer exaggerated when he said,
“Abu’l-Ala is a poet many centuries ahead of his
time.” <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e608" id="xd21e608" class="pginternal">26</a>]</span></p>
<p class="par">Before closing, I wish to call attention to a question
which, though unimportant in itself, is nevertheless worthy of the
consideration of all admirers of Arabic and Persian literature. I refer
to the similarity of thought which exists between Omar Khayyam and
Abu’l-Ala. The former, I have reason to believe, was an imitator
or a disciple of the latter. The birth of the first poet and the death
of the second are not very far apart: they both occurred about the
middle of the eleventh century. The English reading public here and
abroad has already formed its opinion of Khayyam. Let it not,
therefore, be supposed that in making this claim I aim to shake or
undermine its great faith. My desire is to confirm, not to
weaken,—to expand, not contract,—the Oriental influence on
the Occidental mind.</p>
<p class="par">Whoever will take the trouble, however, to read Omar
Khayyam in conjunction with what is here translated of Abu’l-Ala,
can not fail to see the striking similarity in thought and image of
certain phases of the creed or the lack of creed of both
poets.<a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e613" id="xd21e613src">23</a> To be sure, the skepticism and pessimism of Omar
are to a great extent imported from Ma’arrah. But the Arab
philosopher in his religious opinions is far more outspoken than the
Persian tent-maker. I do not say that Omar was a plagiarist; but I say
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e616" id="xd21e616" class="pginternal">27</a>]</span>this: just as Voltaire, for instance, acquired
most of his liberal and skeptical views from Hobbes, Locke and Bayle,
so did Omar acquire his from Abu’l-Ala. In my notes to these
quatrains I have quoted in comparison from both the Fitzgerald and the
Herron-Allen versions of the Persian poet; and with so much or so
little said, I leave the matter in the hands of the reader, who, upon a
careful examination, will doubtless bear me out as to this point.
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e618" id="xd21e618" class="pginternal">35</a>]</span></p>
</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<hr class="fnsep"/>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e334src" id="xd21e334">1</a></span> My learned
friend, Count E. de Mulinen, called my attention to the work of Von
Kremer on Abu’l-Ala. And I have seen copies of a certain German
Asiatic Review in which were published translations, made by that
eminent Orientalist, of many poems from the Luzumiyat. He speaks of
Abu’l-Ala as one of the greatest moralists of all times, whose
profound genius anticipated much that is commonly attributed to the
so-called modern spirit of <span class="corr" title="Source: enlightment" id="xd21e337">enlightenment</span>.</p>
<p class="par footnote">Professor D. S. Margoliouth has also translated
into English the Letters of Abu’l-Ala, which were published with
the Arabic Text at the Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1898. Also Professor
Raynold A. Nicholson, in his work, “A Literary History of the
Arabs,” discusses the poet at length and renders into English
some poems from the Luzumiyat. A work was published by Charles
Carrington, Paris, 1904, under the title, “<span lang="fr">Un
Précurseur d’Omar Khayyam, Le Poéte Aveugle:
Extraits de Poémes et de Lettres d’Abu’l-Ala
al-Ma’arri.</span>” And another, “The Diwan of
Abu’l-Ala,” done into English by Henry Baerlein, who must
have helped himself freely to the Quatrains of Von
Kremer. <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e334src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e346src" id="xd21e346">2</a></span> For a
picturesque description of the squalidness and sordidness of
Ma’arrah and its people, see Letter XX of “The Letters of
Abu’l-Ala,” Oxford Edition. <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e346src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e355src" id="xd21e355">3</a></span> When he
visited Baghdad he was about thirty-seven years of age. And when he
went to attend <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e357" id="xd21e357" class="pginternal">30</a>]</span>a lecture there by one of the leading
scholars, he was called by the lecturer, <i data-invalid-lang="ar-latn">istabl</i>,
which is Syrian slang for blind. <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e355src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e363src" id="xd21e363">4</a></span> “He
was four years of age when he had the attack of small-pox. The sight of
his left eye was entirely lost and the eyeball of his right had turned
white. Al-Hafiz us-Silafi relates: ‘Abu Muhammad Abdallah told me
that he visited him (Abu’l-Ala) once with his uncle and found him
sitting on an old hair matting. He was very old, and the disease that
attacked him in his boyhood had left its deep traces on his emaciated
face. He bade me come near him and blessed me as he placed his hand on
my head. I was a boy then, and I can picture him before me now. I
looked into his eyes and remarked how the one was horribly protruding,
and the other, buried in its socket, could barely be
seen.’”—Ibn Khillikan. <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e363src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e368src" id="xd21e368">5</a></span> “How
long he retained any sort of vision is not certain. His frequent
references in his writings to stars, flowers, and the forms of the
Arabic letters imply that he could see a little at least some years
after this calamity.<span class="corr" title="Not in source" id="xd21e371">”</span>—D. S. Margoliouth: The Letters of
Abu’l-Ala.</p>
<p class="par footnote">“He used to play chess and
<i>nard</i>.”—Safadi. <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e368src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e382src" id="xd21e382">6</a></span> For an
interesting account of Literary Society in Baghdad see Renan’s
“Islam and Science”; also the Biography to the Letters of
Abu’l-Ala. Prof. Margoliouth, though not unfair in his judgment
of the poet, is unnecessarily captious at times. He would seem partial
to the suffrage of orthodox Mohammedans with regard to
Abu’l-Ala’s unorthodox religious views. But they have a
reason, these ulama, for endeavoring to keep a genius like
Abu’l-Ala within the pale of belief. Which reason, let us hope,
has no claim on Prof. Margoliouth. And in his attempt to depreciate
Abu’l-Ala as a disinterested <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e385" id="xd21e385" class="pginternal">31</a>]</span>and
independent scholar and poet, he does not escape the inconsistency
which often follows in the wake of cavil. Read this, for instance:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="par footnote first">“Like many of those who have failed
to secure material prosperity, he found comfort in a system which
flatters the vanity of those who have not succeeded by teaching that
success is not worth attaining.”</p>
</div>
<p class="par"/>
<p class="par footnote">And this, not on the same page perhaps, but
close to it:</p>
<div class="blockquote">
<p class="par footnote first">“For though other roads towards
obtaining the means of supporting himself at Baghdad have been open to
him, <i>that which he refused to follow</i> (the profession of an
encomiast, <i>i. e.</i> a sycophant, a toady) was the most
certain.”</p>
</div>
<p class="par"> <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e382src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e405src" id="xd21e405">7</a></span> Biography
of Abu’l-Ala by Adh-Dhahabi. <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e405src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e414src" id="xd21e414">8</a></span> “The
Letters, which abound in quotations, enable us to gauge the power of
his memory better than these wonder-loving narrators.”—D.
S. Margoliouth. <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e414src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#note.isrc" id="note.i">9</a></span> In one of his
poems he speaks of three prisons, his body being the third. Here is
Professor Nicholson’s translation:</p>
<div class="q">
<div class="nestedtext">
<div class="nestedbody">
<div class="lgouter footnote">
<p class="line">Methink I am thrice-imprisoned—ask not me</p>
<p class="line">Of news that need no telling—</p>
<p class="line">By loss of sight, confinement in my house,</p>
<p class="line">And this vile body for my spirit’s dwelling.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="par"> <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#note.isrc">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e436src" id="xd21e436">10</a></span> Also his
Commentary on the works of the poet Al-Mutanabbi. <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e436src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e439src" id="xd21e439">11</a></span>
Adh-Dhahabi gives the titles of forty-eight of his works, to which
Safadi adds fourteen. A literary baggage of considerable bulk, had not
most of it <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e441" id="xd21e441" class="pginternal">32</a>]</span>perished when the Crusaders took
Ma’arrah in 1098. Now, the Luzumiyat, the Letters, Suct uz-Zand
and the Epistle of Forgiveness can be obtained in printed
form. <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e439src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e446src" id="xd21e446">12</a></span>
“What he says of Al-Maghribi in the First Letter became literally
true of himself: ‘As Sinai derives its fame from Moses and the
Stone from Abraham, so Ma’arrah is from this time (after his
return from Baghdad) known by him.’”—D. S.
Margoliouth. <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e446src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e456src" id="xd21e456">13</a></span> Even
before he visited Baghdad he had a pension of thirty dinars (about
$100), half of which he paid to his servant, and the other half was
sufficient to secure for him the necessaries of life. “He lived
on lentils and figs,” says Adh-Dhahabi; “he slept on a felt
mattress; he wore nothing but cotton garments; and his dwelling was
furnished with a straw matting.” <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e456src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e462src" id="xd21e462">14</a></span> We have
the following from Adh-Dhahabi:</p>
<p class="par footnote">“One of these critics came one day to
Abu’l-Ala and relating the conversation himself said, ‘What
is it that is quoted and said about you?’ I asked.</p>
<p class="par footnote">‘It is false; they are jealous of
me,’ he replied.</p>
<p class="par footnote">‘And what have you to incite their
jealousy? You have left for them both this world and the
other.’</p>
<p class="par footnote">‘And the other?’ murmured the poet,
questioning, ruminating. ‘And the other,
too?’” <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e462src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e482src" id="xd21e482">15</a></span> “His
poems, generally known as the Luzumiyat, arrest attention by their
boldness and originality as well as by the sombre and earnest tone
which pervades them.”—Raynold A. Nicholson: A Literary
History of the Arabs. <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e482src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e491src" id="xd21e491">16</a></span> The
Governor of Halab, Salih ibn Mirdas, passed once by Ma’arrah,
when thirty of its distinguished citizens were imprisoned on account of
a riot in the town the previous year. Abu’l-Ala being asked to
intercede for them, was led to Salih, who received him most politely
and asked him what he desired. The poet, in eloquent but unflattering
speech, asked Salih ‘to take and give forgiveness.’ And the
Governor, not displeased, replied: ‘I grant it you.’
Whereupon the prisoners were released. <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e491src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e497src" id="xd21e497">17</a></span> “His
poems leave no aspect of the age (in which he lived) untouched, and
present a vivid picture of degeneracy and corruption, in which
tyrannous rulers, venal judges, hypocritical and unscrupulous
theologians, swindling astrologers, roving swarms of dervishes and
godless Carmathians, occupy a prominent place.”—Raynold A.
Nicholson: A Literary History of the Arabs. <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e497src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e527src" id="xd21e527">18</a></span> “The
Mohammedan critics who thought he let his opinions be guided by his pen
probably came near the truth. And any man who writes in such fetters as
the meter (he means the rhyme-ending; for Abu’l-Ala made use of
every known meter of Arabic prosody) of the Luzumiyat imposes, can
exercise but slight control over his thoughts.”—D. S.
Margoliouth: Letters of Abu’l-Ala. <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e527src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e544src" id="xd21e544">19</a></span> This work,
of which Professor Nicholson says there are but two copies extant, one
in Constantinople and the other in his own Collection, was published in
Cairo, in 1907, edited by Sheikh Ibrahim ul-Yazeji. <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e544src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e559src" id="xd21e559">20</a></span> “To
let go a flea is a more virtuous act than to give a dirham to a
beggar.”—Abu’l-Ala. <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e559src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e566src" id="xd21e566">21</a></span> The
Orthodox, <i>i. e.</i> the Mohammedans. <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e566src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e601src" id="xd21e601">22</a></span> I do not
find these verses in the printed copies of either the Luzumiyat or Suct
uz-Zand. But they are quoted, from some Ms. copy I suppose, by the
historian Abu’l-Fida. <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e601src">↑</a></p>
<p class="par footnote"><span class="label"><a class="noteref pginternal" href="#xd21e613src" id="xd21e613">23</a></span> Omar wrote
poetry in Arabic too. My learned friend, Isa Iskandar Maluf of Zehleh,
Mt. Lebanon, showed me some quatrains of “Omar the Tent-maker and
Astronomer,” in an old Arabic Ms. which bear a striking
resemblance to some of Abu’l-Ala’s both in thought and
style. <a class="fnarrow pginternal" href="#xd21e613src">↑</a></p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="body">
<div class="div1 chapter" id="luzumiyat"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main">THE LUZUMIYAT OF ABU’L-ALA</h2>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e623" id="xd21e623" class="pginternal">37</a>]</span></p>
<div class="div2 section" id="s1"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">I</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">The sable wings of Night pursuing day</p>
<p class="line">Across the opalescent hills, display</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">The wondrous star-gems which the fiery
suns</p>
<p class="line">Are scattering upon their fiery way.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s2"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">II</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">O my Companion, Night is passing fair,</p>
<p class="line">Fairer than aught the dawn and sundown wear;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">And fairer, too, than all the gilded days</p>
<p class="line">Of blond Illusion and its golden snare.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e648" id="xd21e648" class="pginternal">38</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s3"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">III</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Hark, in the minarets muazzens call</p>
<p class="line">The evening hour that in the interval</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Of darkness Ahmad might remembered
be,—</p>
<p class="line">Remembered of the Darkness be they all.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s4"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">IV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And hear the others who with cymbals try</p>
<p class="line">To stay the feet of every passer-by:</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">The market-men along the darkling lane</p>
<p class="line">Are crying up their wares.—Oh! let them
cry<span class="corr" title="Source: ," id="xd21e673">.</span></p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e675" id="xd21e675" class="pginternal">39</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s5"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">V</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Mohammed or Messiah! Hear thou me,</p>
<p class="line">The truth entire nor here nor there can be;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">How should our God who made the sun and
moon</p>
<p class="line">Give all his light to One, I cannot see.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s6"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">VI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Come, let us with the naked Night now rest</p>
<p class="line">And read in Allah’s Book the sonnet best:</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">The Pleiads—ah, the Moon from them
departs,—</p>
<p class="line">She draws her veil and hastens toward the west.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e700" id="xd21e700" class="pginternal">40</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s7"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">VII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">The Pleiads follow; and our Ethiop Queen,</p>
<p class="line">Emerging from behind her starry screen,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Will steep her tresses in the saffron dye</p>
<p class="line">Of dawn, and vanish in the morning sheen.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s8"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">VIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">The secret of the day and night is in</p>
<p class="line">The constellations, which forever spin</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Around each other in the
comet-dust;—</p>
<p class="line">The comet-dust and humankind are kin.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e725" id="xd21e725" class="pginternal">41</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s9"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">IX</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">But whether of dust or fire or foam, the glaive</p>
<p class="line">Of Allah cleaves the planet and the wave</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Of this mysterious Heaven-Sea of life,</p>
<p class="line">And lo! we have the Cradle of the Grave.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s10"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">X</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">The Grave and Cradle, the untiring twain,</p>
<p class="line">Who in the markets of this narrow lane</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Bordered of darkness, ever give and take</p>
<p class="line">In equal measure—what’s the loss or
gain?</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e751" id="xd21e751" class="pginternal">42</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s11"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Ay, like the circles which the sun doth spin</p>
<p class="line">Of gossamer, we end as we begin;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Our feet are on the heads of those that
pass,</p>
<p class="line">But ever their Graves around our Cradles grin.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s12"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And what avails it then that Man be born</p>
<p class="line">To joy or sorrow?—why rejoice or mourn?</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">The doling doves are calling to the rose;</p>
<p class="line">The dying rose is bleeding o’er the thorn.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e776" id="xd21e776" class="pginternal">43</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s13"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And he the Messenger, who takes away</p>
<p class="line">The faded garments, purple, white, and gray</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Of all our dreams unto the Dyer, will</p>
<p class="line">Bring back new robes to-morrow—so they say.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s14"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XIV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">But now the funeral is passing by,</p>
<p class="line">And in its trail, beneath this moaning sky,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">The howdaj comes,—both vanish into
night;</p>
<p class="line">To me are one, the sob, the joyous cry.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e801" id="xd21e801" class="pginternal">44</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s15"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">With tombs and ruined temples groans the land</p>
<p class="line">In which our forbears in the drifting sand</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Arise as dunes upon the track of Time</p>
<p class="line">To mark the cycles of the moving hand</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s16"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XVI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Of Fate. Alas! and we shall follow soon</p>
<p class="line">Into the night eternal or the noon;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">The wayward daughters of the spheres
return</p>
<p class="line">Unto the bosom of their sun or moon.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e826" id="xd21e826" class="pginternal">45</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s17"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XVII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And from the last days of Thamud and ‘Ad</p>
<p class="line">Up to the first of Hashem’s fearless lad,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Who smashed the idols of his mighty tribe,</p>
<p class="line">What idols and what heroes Death has had!</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s18"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XVIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Tread lightly, for the mighty that have been</p>
<p class="line">Might now be breathing in the dust unseen;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Lightly, the violets beneath thy feet</p>
<p class="line">Spring from the mole of some Arabian queen.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e851" id="xd21e851" class="pginternal">46</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s19"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XIX</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Many a grave embraces friend and foe</p>
<p class="line">Behind the curtain of this sorry show</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Of love and hate inscrutable; alas!</p>
<p class="line">The Fates will always reap the while they sow.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s20"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XX</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">The silken fibre of the fell Zakkum,</p>
<p class="line">As warp and woof, is woven on the loom</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Of life into a tapestry of dreams</p>
<p class="line">To decorate the chariot-seat of Doom.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e876" id="xd21e876" class="pginternal">47</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s21"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XXI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And still we weave, and still we are content</p>
<p class="line">In slaving for the sovereigns who have spent</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">The savings of the toiling of the mind</p>
<p class="line">Upon the glory of Dismemberment.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s22"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XXII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Nor king nor slave the hungry Days will spare;</p>
<p class="line">Between their fangéd Hours alike we fare:</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Anon they bound upon us while we play</p>
<p class="line">Unheeding at the threshold of their Lair.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e902" id="xd21e902" class="pginternal">48</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s23"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XXIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Then Jannat or Juhannam? From the height</p>
<p class="line">Of reason I can see nor fire nor light</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">That feeds not on the darknesses; we pass</p>
<p class="line">From world to world, like shadows through the
night.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s24"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XXIV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Or sleep—and shall it be eternal sleep</p>
<p class="line">Somewhither in the bosom of the deep</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Infinities of cosmic dust, or here</p>
<p class="line">Where gracile cypresses the vigil keep!</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e927" id="xd21e927" class="pginternal">49</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s25"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XXV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Upon the threshing-floor of life I burn</p>
<p class="line">Beside the Winnower a word to learn;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">And only this: Man’s of the soil and
sun,</p>
<p class="line">And to the soil and sun he shall return.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s26"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XXVI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And like a spider’s house or sparrow’s
nest,</p>
<p class="line">The Sultan’s palace, though upon the crest</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Of glory’s mountain, soon or late must
go:</p>
<p class="line">Ay, all abodes to ruin are addrest.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e952" id="xd21e952" class="pginternal">50</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s27"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XXVII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">So, too, the creeds of Man: the one prevails</p>
<p class="line">Until the other comes; and this one fails</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">When that one triumphs; ay, the lonesome
world</p>
<p class="line">Will always want the latest fairy-tales.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s28"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XXVIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Seek not the Tavern of Belief, my friend,</p>
<p class="line">Until the Sakis there their morals mend;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">A lie imbibed a thousand lies will breed,</p>
<p class="line">And thou’lt become a Saki in the end.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e977" id="xd21e977" class="pginternal">51</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s29"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XXIX</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">By fearing whom I trust I find my way</p>
<p class="line">To truth; by trusting wholly I betray</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">The trust of wisdom; better far is doubt</p>
<p class="line">Which brings the false into the light of day.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s30"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XXX</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Or wilt thou commerce have with those who make</p>
<p class="line">Rugs of the rainbow, rainbows of the snake,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Snakes of a staff, and other wondrous
things?—</p>
<p class="line">The burning thirst a mirage can not slake.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1002" id="xd21e1002" class="pginternal">52</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s31"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XXXI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Religion is a maiden veiled in prayer,</p>
<p class="line">Whose bridal gifts and dowry those who care</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Can buy in Mutakallem’s shop of
words</p>
<p class="line">But I for such, a dirham can not spare.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s32"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XXXII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Why linger here, why turn another page?</p>
<p class="line">Oh! seal with doubt the whole book of the age;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Doubt every one, even him, the seeming
slave</p>
<p class="line">Of righteousness, and doubt the canting sage.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1028" id="xd21e1028" class="pginternal">53</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s33"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XXXIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Some day the weeping daughters of Hadil</p>
<p class="line">Will say unto the bulbuls: “Let’s
appeal</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">To Allah in behalf of Brother Man</p>
<p class="line">Who’s at the mercy now of Ababil.”</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s34"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XXXIV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Of Ababil! I would the tale were true,—</p>
<p class="line">Would all the birds were such winged furies too;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">The scourging and the purging were a boon</p>
<p class="line">For me, O my dear Brothers, and for you.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1053" id="xd21e1053" class="pginternal">54</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s35"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XXXV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Methinks Allah divides me to complete</p>
<p class="line">His problem, which with Xs is replete;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">For I am free and I am too in chains</p>
<p class="line">Groping along the labyrinthine street.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s36"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XXXVI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And round the Well how oft my Soul doth grope</p>
<p class="line">Athirst; but lo! my Bucket hath no Rope:</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">I cry for water, and the deep, dark Well</p>
<p class="line">Echoes my wailing cry, but not my hope.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1078" id="xd21e1078" class="pginternal">55</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s37"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XXXVII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Ah, many have I seen of those who fell</p>
<p class="line">While drawing, with a swagger, from the Well;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">They came with Rope and Bucket, and they
went</p>
<p class="line">Empty of hand another tale to tell.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s38"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XXXVIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">The <i>I</i> in me standing upon the brink</p>
<p class="line">Would leap into the Well to get a drink;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">But how to rise once in the depth, I cry,</p>
<p class="line">And cowardly behind my logic slink.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1106" id="xd21e1106" class="pginternal">56</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s39"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XXXIX</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And she: “How long must I the burden bear?</p>
<p class="line">How long this tattered garment must I wear?”</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">And I: “Why wear it? Leave it here, and
go</p>
<p class="line">Away without it—little do I care.”</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s40"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XL</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">But once when we were quarreling, the door</p>
<p class="line">Was opened by a Visitor who bore</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Both Rope and Pail; he offered them and
said:</p>
<p class="line">“Drink, if you will, but once, and
nevermore.”</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1131" id="xd21e1131" class="pginternal">57</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s41"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XLI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">One draught, more bitter than the Zakkum tree,</p>
<p class="line">Brought us unto the land of mystery</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Where rising Sand and Dust and Flame
conceal</p>
<p class="line">The door of every Caravanseri.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s42"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XLII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">We reach a door and there the legend find.</p>
<p class="line">“To all the Pilgrims of the Human Mind:</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Knock and pass on!” We knock and knock
and knock;</p>
<p class="line">But no one answers save the moaning wind<span class="corr" title="Not in source" id="xd21e1156">.</span></p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1158" id="xd21e1158" class="pginternal">58</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s43"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XLIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">How like a door the knowledge we attain,</p>
<p class="line">Which door is on the bourne of the Inane;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">It opens and our nothingness is
closed,—</p>
<p class="line">It closes and in darkness we remain.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s44"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XLIV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Hither we come unknowing, hence we go;</p>
<p class="line">Unknowing we are messaged to and fro;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">And yet we think we know all things of
earth</p>
<p class="line">And sky—the suns and stars we think we know.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1184" id="xd21e1184" class="pginternal">59</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s45"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XLV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Apply thy wit, O Brother, here and there</p>
<p class="line">Upon this and upon that; but beware</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Lest in the end—ah, better at the
start</p>
<p class="line">Go to the Tinker for a slight repair.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s46"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XLVI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And why so much ado, and wherefore lay</p>
<p class="line">The burden of the years upon the day</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Of thy vain dreams? Who polishes his sword</p>
<p class="line">Morning and eve will polish it away.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1209" id="xd21e1209" class="pginternal">60</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s47"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XLVII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">I heard it whispered in the cryptic streets</p>
<p class="line">Where every sage the same dumb shadow meets:</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">“We are but words fallen from the lipe
of Time</p>
<p class="line">Which God, that we might understand,
repeats.”</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s48"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XLVIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Another said: “The creeping worm hath shown,</p>
<p class="line">In her discourse on human flesh and bone,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">That Man was once the bed on which she
slept—</p>
<p class="line">The walking dust was once a thing of stone.”</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1234" id="xd21e1234" class="pginternal">61</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s49"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XLIX</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And still another: “We are coins which fade</p>
<p class="line">In circulation, coins which Allah made</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">To cheat Iblis: the good and bad alike</p>
<p class="line">Are spent by Fate upon a passing shade.”</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s50"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">L</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And in the pottery the potter cried,</p>
<p class="line">As on his work shone all the master’s
pride—</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">“How is it, Rabbi, I, thy slave, can
make</p>
<p class="line">Such vessels as nobody dare deride?”</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1259" id="xd21e1259" class="pginternal">62</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s51"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">The Earth then spake: “My children silent be;</p>
<p class="line">Same are to God the camel and the flea:</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">He makes a mess of me to nourish you,</p>
<p class="line">Then makes a mess of you to nourish me.”</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s52"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Now, I believe the Potter will essay</p>
<p class="line">Once more the Wheel, and from a better clay</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Will make a better Vessel, and perchance</p>
<p class="line">A masterpiece which will endure for aye.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1284" id="xd21e1284" class="pginternal">63</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s53"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">With better skill he even will remould</p>
<p class="line">The scattered potsherds of the New and Old;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Then you and I will not disdain to buy,</p>
<p class="line">Though in the mart of Iblis they be sold.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s54"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LIV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Sooth I have told the masters of the mart</p>
<p class="line">Of rusty creeds and Babylonian art</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Of magic. Now the truth about
myself—</p>
<p class="line">Here is the secret of my wincing heart.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1310" id="xd21e1310" class="pginternal">64</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s55"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">I muse, but in my musings I recall</p>
<p class="line">The days of my iniquity; we’re all—</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">An arrow shot across the wilderness,</p>
<p class="line">Somewhither, in the wilderness must fall.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s56"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LVI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">I laugh, but in my laughter-cup I pour</p>
<p class="line">The tears of scorn and melancholy sore;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">I who am shattered by the hand of Doubt,</p>
<p class="line">Like glass to be remoulded nevermore.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1335" id="xd21e1335" class="pginternal">65</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s57"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LVII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">I wheedle, too, even like my slave Zeidun,</p>
<p class="line">Who robs at dawn his brother, and at noon</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Prostrates himself in prayer—ah, let us
pray</p>
<p class="line">That Night might blot us and our sins, and soon.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s58"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LVIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">But in the fatal coils, without intent,</p>
<p class="line">We sin; wherefore a future punishment?</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">They say the metal dead a deadly steel</p>
<p class="line">Becomes with Allah’s knowledge and consent.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1360" id="xd21e1360" class="pginternal">66</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s59"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LIX</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And even the repentant sinner’s tear</p>
<p class="line">Falling into Juhannam’s very ear,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Goes to its heart, extinguishes its fire</p>
<p class="line">For ever and forever,—so I hear.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s60"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LX</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Between the white and purple Words of Time</p>
<p class="line">In motley garb with Destiny I rhyme:</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">The colored glasses to the water give</p>
<p class="line">The colors of a symbolry sublime.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1385" id="xd21e1385" class="pginternal">67</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s61"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">How oft, when young, my brothers I would shun</p>
<p class="line">If their religious feelings were not spun</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Of my own cobweb, which I find was but</p>
<p class="line">A spider’s revelation of the sun.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s62"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Now, mosques and churches—even a Kaaba Stone,</p>
<p class="line">Korans and Bibles—even a martyr’s
bone,—</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">All these and more my heart can tolerate,</p>
<p class="line">For my religion’s love, and love alone.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1410" id="xd21e1410" class="pginternal">68</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s63"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">To humankind, O Brother, consecrate</p>
<p class="line">Thy heart, and shun the hundred Sects that prate</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">About the things they little know
about—</p>
<p class="line">Let all receive thy pity, none thy hate.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s64"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXIV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">The tavern and the temple also shun,</p>
<p class="line">For sheikh and libertine in sooth are one;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">And when the pious knave begins to pule,</p>
<p class="line">The knave in purple breaks his vow anon.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1435" id="xd21e1435" class="pginternal">69</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s65"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“The wine’s forbidden,” say these
honest folk,</p>
<p class="line">But for themselves the law they will revoke;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">The snivelling sheikh says he’s without
a garb,</p>
<p class="line">When in the tap-house he had pawned his
cloak<span class="corr" title="Source: ," id="xd21e1449">.</span></p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s66"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXVI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Or in the house of lust. The priestly name</p>
<p class="line">And priestly turban once were those of Shame—</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">And Shame is preaching in the pulpit
now—</p>
<p class="line">If pulpits tumble down, I’m not to blame.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1463" id="xd21e1463" class="pginternal">70</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s67"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXVII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">For after she declaims upon the vows</p>
<p class="line">Of Faith, she pusillanimously bows</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Before the Sultan’s wine-empurpled
throne,</p>
<p class="line">While he and all his courtezans carouse.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s68"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXVIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Carouse, ye sovereign lords! The wheel will roll</p>
<p class="line">Forever to confound and to console:</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Who sips to-day the golden cup will drink</p>
<p class="line">Mayhap to-morrow in a wooden bowl—</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1488" id="xd21e1488" class="pginternal">71</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s69"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXIX</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And silent drink. The tumult of our mirth</p>
<p class="line">Is worse than our mad welcoming of birth:—</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">The thunder hath a grandeur, but the
rains,</p>
<p class="line">Without the thunder, quench the thirst of Earth.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s70"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXX</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">The Prophets, too, among us come to teach,</p>
<p class="line">Are one with those who from the pulpit preach;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">They pray, and slay, and pass away, and
yet</p>
<p class="line">Our ills are as the pebbles on the beach.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1513" id="xd21e1513" class="pginternal">72</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s71"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXXI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And though around the temple they should run</p>
<p class="line">For seventy times and seven, and in the sun</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Of mad devotion drool, their prayers are
still</p>
<p class="line">Like their desires of feasting-fancies spun.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s72"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXXII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Oh! let them in the marshes grope, or ride</p>
<p class="line">Their jaded Myths along the mountain-side;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Come up with me, O Brother, to the heights</p>
<p class="line">Where Reason is the prophet and the guide.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1538" id="xd21e1538" class="pginternal">73</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s73"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXXIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“What is thy faith and creed,” they ask of
me,</p>
<p class="line">“And who art thou? Unseal thy
pedigree.”—</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">I am the child of Time, my tribe, mankind,</p>
<p class="line">And now this world’s my caravanseri.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s74"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXXIV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Swathe thee in wool, my Sufi friend, and go</p>
<p class="line">Thy way; in cotton I the wiser grow;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">But we ourselves are shreds of earth, and
soon</p>
<p class="line">The Tailor of the Universe will sew.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1563" id="xd21e1563" class="pginternal">74</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s75"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXXV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Ay! suddenly the mystic Hand will seal</p>
<p class="line">The saint’s devotion and the sinner’s
weal;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">They worship Saturn, but I worship One</p>
<p class="line">Before whom Saturn and the Heavens kneel.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s76"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXXVI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Among the crumbling ruins of the creeds</p>
<p class="line">The Scout upon his camel played his reeds</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">And called out to his people,—“Let
us hence!</p>
<p class="line">The pasture here is full of noxious weeds.”</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1589" id="xd21e1589" class="pginternal">75</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s77"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXXVII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Among us falsehood is proclaimed aloud,</p>
<p class="line">But truth is whispered to the phantom bowed</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Of conscience; ay! and Wrong is ever
crowned,</p>
<p class="line">While Right and Reason are denied a shroud.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s78"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXXVIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And why in this dark Kingdom tribute pay?</p>
<p class="line">With clamant multitudes why stop to pray?</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Oh! hear the inner Voice:—“If
thou’lt be right,</p>
<p class="line">Do what they deem is wrong, and go thy way.”</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1614" id="xd21e1614" class="pginternal">76</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s79"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXXIX</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Thy way unto the Sun the spaces through</p>
<p class="line">Where king Orion’s black-eyed huris slew</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">The Mother of Night to guide the Wings that
bear</p>
<p class="line">The flame divine hid in a drop of dew.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s80"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXXX</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Hear ye who in the dust of ages creep,</p>
<p class="line">And in the halls of wicked masters sleep:—</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Arise! and out of this wan weariness</p>
<p class="line">Where Allah’s laughter makes the Devil weep.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1639" id="xd21e1639" class="pginternal">77</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s81"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXXXI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Arise! for lo! the Laughter and the Weeping</p>
<p class="line">Reveal the Weapon which the Master’s keeping</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Above your heads; Oh! take it up and
strike!</p>
<p class="line">The lion of tyranny is only sleeping.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s82"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXXXII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Evil and Virtue? Shadows on the street</p>
<p class="line">Of Fate and Vanity,—but shadows meet</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">When in the gloaming they are hast’ning
forth</p>
<p class="line">To drink with Night annihilation sweet.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1664" id="xd21e1664" class="pginternal">78</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s83"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXXXIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And thus the Sun will write and will efface</p>
<p class="line">The mystic symbols which the sages trace</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">In vain, for all the worlds of God are
stored</p>
<p class="line">In his enduring vessels Time and Space.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s84"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXXXIV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">For all my learning’s but a veil, I guess,</p>
<p class="line">Veiling the phantom of my nothingness;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Howbeit, there are those who think me
wise,</p>
<p class="line">And those who think me—even these I bless.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1689" id="xd21e1689" class="pginternal">79</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s85"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXXXV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And all my years, as vapid as my lay,</p>
<p class="line">Are bitter morsels of a mystic day,—</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">The day of Fate, who carries in his lap</p>
<p class="line">December snows and snow-white flowers of May.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s86"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXXXVI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Allah, my sleep is woven through, it seems,</p>
<p class="line">With burning threads of night and golden beams;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">But when my dreams are evil they come
true;</p>
<p class="line">When they are not, they are, alas! but dreams.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1714" id="xd21e1714" class="pginternal">80</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s87"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXXXVII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">The subtle ways of Destiny I know;</p>
<p class="line">In me she plays her game of “Give and
Go.”</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Misfortune I receive in cash, but joy,</p>
<p class="line">In drafts on Heaven or on the winds that blow.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s88"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXXXVIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">I give and go, grim Destiny,—I play</p>
<p class="line">Upon this checker-board of Night and Day</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">The dark game with thee, but the day will
come</p>
<p class="line">When one will turn the Board the other way.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1740" id="xd21e1740" class="pginternal">81</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s89"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">LXXXIX</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">If my house-swallow, laboring with zest,</p>
<p class="line">Felt like myself the burden of unrest,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Unlightened by inscrutable designs,</p>
<p class="line">She would not build her young that cozy nest.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s90"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XC</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Thy life with guiltless life-blood do not
stain—</p>
<p class="line">Hunt not the children of the woods; in vain</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Thou’lt try one day to wash thy bloody
hand:</p>
<p class="line">Nor hunter here nor hunted long remain<span class="corr" title="Not in source" id="xd21e1765">.</span></p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1767" id="xd21e1767" class="pginternal">82</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s91"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XCI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Oh! cast my dust away from thee, and doff</p>
<p class="line">Thy cloak of sycophancy and like stuff:</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">I’m but a shadow on the sandy
waste,—</p>
<p class="line">Enough of thy duplicity, enough!</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s92"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XCII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Behold! the Veil that hid thy soul is torn</p>
<p class="line">And all thy secrets on the winds are borne:</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">The hand of Sin has written on thy face</p>
<p class="line">“Awake, for these untimely furrows
warn!”</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1792" id="xd21e1792" class="pginternal">83</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s93"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XCIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">A prince of souls, ‘tis sung in ancient lay,</p>
<p class="line">One morning sought a vesture of the clay;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">He came into the Pottery, the fool—</p>
<p class="line">The lucky fool was warned to stay away.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s94"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XCIV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">But I was not. Oh! that the Fates decree</p>
<p class="line">That I now cast aside this clay of me;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">My soul and body wedded for a while</p>
<p class="line">Are sick and would that separation be.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1817" id="xd21e1817" class="pginternal">84</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s95"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XCV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“Thou shalt not kill!”—Thy words, O
God, we heed,</p>
<p class="line">Though thy two Soul-devouring Angels feed</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Thy Promise of another life on
this,—</p>
<p class="line">To have spared us both, it were a boon indeed.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s96"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XCVI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Oh! that some one would but return to tell</p>
<p class="line">If old Nubakht is burning now in hell,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Or if the workers for the Prophet’s
prize</p>
<p class="line">Are laughing at his Paradisal sell.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1842" id="xd21e1842" class="pginternal">85</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s97"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XCVII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Once I have tried to string a few Pearl-seeds</p>
<p class="line">Upon my Rosary of wooden beads;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">But I have searched, and I have searched in
vain</p>
<p class="line">For pearls in all the caverns of the creeds</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s98"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XCVIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And in the palaces of wealth I found</p>
<p class="line">Some beads of wisdom scattered on the ground,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Around the throne of Power, beneath the
feet</p>
<p class="line">Of fair-faced slaves with flowers of folly crowned.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1868" id="xd21e1868" class="pginternal">86</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s99"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">XCIX</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Thy wealth can shed no tears around thy bier,</p>
<p class="line">Nor can it wash thy hands of shame and fear;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Ere thou departest with it freely
part<span class="corr" title="Source: ." id="xd21e1879">,</span>—</p>
<p class="line">Let others plead for thee and God will hear.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s100"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">C</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">For me thy silks and feathers have no charm</p>
<p class="line">The pillow I like best is my right arm;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">The comforts of this passing show I spurn,</p>
<p class="line">For Poverty can do the soul no harm.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1896" id="xd21e1896" class="pginternal">87</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s101"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">The guiding hand of Allah I can see</p>
<p class="line">Upon my staff: of what use then is he</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Who’d be the blind man’s guide?
Thou silent oak,</p>
<p class="line">No son of Eve shall walk with me and thee.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s102"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">My life’s the road on which I blindly speed:</p>
<p class="line">My goal’s the grave on which I plant a reed</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">To shape my Hope, but soon the Hand unseen</p>
<p class="line">Will strike, and lo! I’m but a sapless weed.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1921" id="xd21e1921" class="pginternal">88</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s103"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">O Rabbi, curse us not if we have been</p>
<p class="line">Nursed in the shadow of the Gate of Sin</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Built by thy hand—yea, ev’n thine
angels blink</p>
<p class="line">When we are coming out and going in.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s104"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CIV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And like the dead of Ind I do not fear</p>
<p class="line">To go to thee in flames; the most austere</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Angel of fire a softer tooth and tongue</p>
<p class="line">Hath he than dreadful Munker and Nakir.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1946" id="xd21e1946" class="pginternal">89</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s105"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Now, at this end of Adam’s line I stand</p>
<p class="line">Holding my father’s life-curse in my hand,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Doing no one the wrong that he did
me:—</p>
<p class="line">Ah, would that he were barren as the sand!</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s106"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CVI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Ay, thus thy children, though they sovereigns be,</p>
<p class="line">When truth upon them dawns, will turn on thee,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Who cast them into life’s dark
labyrinth</p>
<p class="line">Where even old Izrail can not see.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1971" id="xd21e1971" class="pginternal">90</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s107"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CVII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">And in the labyrinth both son and sire</p>
<p class="line">Awhile will fan and fuel hatred’s fire;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Sparks of the log of evil are all men</p>
<p class="line">Allwhere—extinguished be the race entire!</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s108"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CVIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">If miracles were wrought in ancient years,</p>
<p class="line">Why not to-day, O Heaven-cradled seers?</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">The highway’s strewn with dead, the
lepers weep,</p>
<p class="line">If ye but knew,—if ye but saw their tears!</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e1996" id="xd21e1996" class="pginternal">91</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s109"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CIX</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Fan thou a lisping fire and it will leap</p>
<p class="line">In flames, but dost thou fan an ashy heap?</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">They would respond, indeed, whom thou dost
call,</p>
<p class="line">Were they not dead, alas! or dead asleep.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s110"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CX</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">The way of vice is open as the sky,</p>
<p class="line">The way of virtue’s like the needle’s
eye;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">But whether here or there, the eager Soul</p>
<p class="line">Has only two Companions—Whence and Why.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e2022" id="xd21e2022" class="pginternal">92</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s111"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CXI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Whence come, O firmament, thy myriad lights?</p>
<p class="line">Whence comes thy sap, O vineyard of the heights?</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Whence comes the perfume of the rose, and
whence</p>
<p class="line">The spirit-larva which the body blights?</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s112"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CXII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Whence does the nettle get its bitter sting?</p>
<p class="line">Whence do the honey bees their honey bring?</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Whence our Companions, too—our Whence
and Why?</p>
<p class="line">O Soul, I do not know a single thing!</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e2047" id="xd21e2047" class="pginternal">93</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s113"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CXIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">How many like us in the ages past</p>
<p class="line">Have blindly soared, though like a pebble cast,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Seeking the veil of mystery to tear,</p>
<p class="line">But fell accurst beneath the burning blast?</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s114"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CXIV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Why try to con the book of earth and sky,</p>
<p class="line">Why seek the truth which neither you nor I</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Can grasp? But Death methinks the secret
keeps,</p>
<p class="line">And will impart it to us by and by.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e2072" id="xd21e2072" class="pginternal">94</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s115"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CXV</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">The Sultan, too, relinquishing his throne</p>
<p class="line">Must wayfare through the darkening dust alone</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Where neither crown nor kingdom be, and
he,</p>
<p class="line">Part of the Secret, here and there is blown.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s116"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CXVI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">To clay the mighty Sultan must return</p>
<p class="line">And, chancing, help a praying slave to burn</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">His midnight oil before the face of Him,</p>
<p class="line">Who of the Sultan makes an incense urn.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e2097" id="xd21e2097" class="pginternal">95</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s117"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CXVII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Turned to a cup, who once the sword of state</p>
<p class="line">Held o’er the head of slave and potentate,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Is now held in the tippler’s trembling
hand,</p>
<p class="line">Or smashed upon the tavern-floor of Fate.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s118"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CXVIII</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">For this I say, Be watchful of the Cage</p>
<p class="line">Of chance; it opes alike to fool and sage;</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Spy on the moment, for to-morrow’ll
be,</p>
<p class="line">Like yesterday, an obliterated page.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e2122" id="xd21e2122" class="pginternal">96</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s119"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CXIX</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Yea, kiss the rosy cheeks of new-born Day,</p>
<p class="line">And hail eternity in every ray</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Forming a halo round its infant head,</p>
<p class="line">Illumining thy labyrinthine way.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s120"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CXX</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">But I, the thrice-imprisoned, try to troll</p>
<p class="line">Strains of the song of night, which fill with dole</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">My blindness, my confinement, and my
flesh—</p>
<p class="line">The sordid habitation of my soul.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="s121"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main">CXXI</h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">Howbeit, my inner vision heir shall be</p>
<p class="line">To the increasing flames of mystery</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Which may illumine yet my prisons all,</p>
<p class="line">And crown the ever living hope of me.</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e2160" id="xd21e2160" class="pginternal">97</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1 notes" id="notes"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main">NOTES TO THE QUATRAINS</h2>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2164"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s1" class="pginternal">I</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">To open a poem with a few amatory lines, is a
literary tradition among Arab poets. But Abu’l-Ala, having had no
occasion to evince such tender emotions, whether real or merely
academic, succeeded, as in everything else he did, in deviating from
the trodden path. I find, however, in his minor Diwan, <i>Suct
uz-Zand</i><span class="corr" title="Source: ." id="xd21e2172">,</span>
a slight manifestation of his youthful ardor, of which this and the
succeeding quatrains, descriptive of the charms of Night, are fairly
representative.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2175"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s3" class="pginternal">III</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">“Ahmad,” Mohammed the Prophet.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2181"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s4" class="pginternal">IV</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">“And hear the others who with cymbals
try,” etc., meaning the Christians; in the preceding quatrain he
referred to the Mohammedans.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2187"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s7" class="pginternal">VII</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">Milton, in Il Penseroso, also speaks of night as
“the starred Ethiop queen”; and Shakespeare, in Romeo and
Juliet, has these lines:</p>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“Her beauty hangs upon the cheek of night</p>
<p class="line">As a rich jewel in an Ethiop ear.”</p>
</div>
<p class="par first">The source of inspiration is the same to all
world-poets, who only differ sometimes in the jars they bring to the
source. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e2200" id="xd21e2200" class="pginternal">98</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2201"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s13" class="pginternal">XIII</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">The purple, white, and gray garments, symbolizing
Man’s dreams of power, of love, and of bliss.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2207"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s14" class="pginternal">XIV</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">The same idea is expressed by Omar Khayyam. Here
are the first three lines of the 122nd quatrain of Heron-Allen’s
literal translation:</p>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“To him who understands the mysteries of the
world</p>
<p class="line">The joy and sorrow of the world is all the same,</p>
<p class="line">Since the good and the bad of the world all come to an
end.”</p>
</div>
<p class="par first">“Howdaj,” a sort of palanquin borne by
camels; hence, a wedding or a triumphal procession.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2222"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s17" class="pginternal">XVII</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">“Thamud” and “’Ad,”
two of the primitive tribes which figure prominently in the legendary
history of Arabia. They flouted and stoned the prophets that were sent
to them, and are constantly held up in the Koran as terrible examples
of the pride that goeth before destruction.</p>
<p class="par">“Hashem’s fearless lad,” Mohammed the
Prophet.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2230"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s18" class="pginternal">XVIII</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">I quote again from Omar, Fitzgerald’s
translation:</p>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“And this reviving Herb, whose Tender Green</p>
<p class="line">Fledges the River-Lip, on which we lean—</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Ah, lean upon it lightly! for who knows</p>
<p class="line">From what once lovely Lip it springs unseen.”</p>
</div>
<p class="par first">In justice to both the Persian and the Arab poet,
however, I give the 43d quatrain of Heron-Allen’s, which I think
contains two lines of that of Fitzgerald, together with
Abu’l-Ala’s own poetic-fancy. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e2247" id="xd21e2247" class="pginternal">99</a>]</span></p>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“Everywhere that there has been a rose or tulip
bed</p>
<p class="line">There has been spilled the crimson blood of a king;</p>
<p class="line">Every violet shoot that grows from the earth</p>
<p class="line">Is a mole that was once upon the cheek of
beauty.”</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2258"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s20" class="pginternal">XX</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">“Zakkum,” a tree which, in Mohammedan
mythology, is said to have its roots in hell, and from which are fed
the dwellers of hell-fire. In one of the Chapters of the Koran, The
Saffat, I find this upon it: “And is that a pure bounty, or the
Zakkum tree? It is a tree which groweth in hell; its fruits are like
unto the heads of the devils, who eat from it, and from it fill their
stomachs.”</p>
<p class="par">Zakkum is also one of the bitter-fruited trees of
Arabia. And the people there speak of “a mouthful of
zakkum” when they want to describe an unhappy experience. It is
also the name of one of the plants of the desert, whose flower is like
the jasmine; and of one of the trees of Jericho, whose fruit is like
the date, but somewhat bitter.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2266"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s23" class="pginternal">XXIII</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">“Jannat,” Paradise.
“Juhannam,” Hell.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2273"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s29" class="pginternal">XXIX</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">And Tennyson also says:</p>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“There is more truth in honest doubt,</p>
<p class="line">Believe me, than in all the creeds.”</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2284"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s31" class="pginternal">XXXI</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">“Mutakallem,” disputant. The
<i>mutakallemin</i> are the logicians and theologians of Islam.
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e2293" id="xd21e2293" class="pginternal">100</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2295"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s33" class="pginternal">XXXIII</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">Hadil is a poetic term for dove. And in Arabic
mythology it is the name of a particular dove, which died of thirst in
the days of Noah, and is bemoaned until this day.</p>
<p class="par">“Ababil,” a flock of birds, who scourged
with flint-stones which they carried in their beaks, one of the ancient
Arab tribes, noted for its idolatry and evil practices.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2303"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"><a href="#s38" class="pginternal">XXXVIII</a>, <a href="#s93" class="pginternal">XCIII</a>
and <a href="#s94" class="pginternal">XCIV</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">I quote again from Omar, Fitzgerald’s
version, quatrain 44:</p>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“Why, if the Soul can fling the dust aside,</p>
<p class="line">And naked on the air of Heaven ride,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Were’t not a shame—were’t
not a shame for him</p>
<p class="line">In this clay carcass crippled to abide?”</p>
</div>
<p class="par first">And from Heron-Allen’s, quatrain 145:</p>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“O Soul, if thou canst purify thyself from the
dust of the clay,</p>
<p class="line">Thou, naked spirit, canst soar in the
heav’ns,</p>
<p class="line">The Empyrian is thy sphere—let it be thy
shame</p>
<p class="line">That thou comest and art a dweller within the confines
of earth.”</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2335"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s48" class="pginternal">XLVIII</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">“The walking dust was once a thing of
stone,” is my rendering of the line,</p>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“And he concerning whom the world is puzzled</p>
<p class="line">Is an animal evolved of inorganic matter.”</p>
</div>
<p class="par first">This line of Abu’l-Ala is much quoted by his
enthusiastic admirers of the present day to prove <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e2348" id="xd21e2348" class="pginternal">101</a>]</span>that he anticipated Darwin’s theory of
evolution. And it is remarkable how the fancy of the poet sometimes
coincides with the logical conclusions of the scientist.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2350"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s49" class="pginternal">XLIX</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">“Iblis,” the devil.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2356"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s50" class="pginternal">L</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">“Rabbi,” my lord God.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2362"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s56" class="pginternal">LVI</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">This quatrain is quoted by many of the Biographers
of Abu’l-Ala to prove that he is a materialist. Which argument is
easily refuted, however, with others quatrains taken at random from the
Luzumiyat.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2368"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"><a href="#s57" class="pginternal">LVII</a>, <a href="#s58" class="pginternal">LVIII</a> and
<a href="#s59" class="pginternal">LIX</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">Omar was also a confessed cynical-hypocrite. Thus
runs the first line of the 114th quatrain of Heron-Allen’s:</p>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“The world being fleeting I practise naught but
artifice.”</p>
</div>
<p class="par first">And he also chafes in the chains of his sins.
Following is the 23d quatrain of the same translation:</p>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“Khayyam, why mourn for thy sins?</p>
<p class="line">From grieving thus what advantage more or less dost
thou gain?</p>
<p class="line">Mercy was never for him who sins not,</p>
<p class="line">Mercy is granted for sins; why then grieve?”</p>
</div>
<p class="par first">Abu’l-Ala, in a quatrain which I did not
translate, goes even farther in his questioning perplexity.
<span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e2396" id="xd21e2396" class="pginternal">102</a>]</span>“Why do good since thou art to be
forgiven for thy sins?” he asks.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2398"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s62" class="pginternal">LXII</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">“Kaaba Stone,” the sacred black stone
in the Kaaba at Meccah.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2404"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s77" class="pginternal">LXXVII</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">The American poet, Lowell, in “The
Crisis,” utters the same cry:</p>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“Truth forever on the scaffold,</p>
<p class="line">Wrong forever on the throne.”</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2416"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s90" class="pginternal">XC</a></h3>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“And the poor beetle that we tread upon</p>
<p class="line">In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great</p>
<p class="line">As when a giant dies.”</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">—Shakespeare: Measure for Measure.</p>
<p class="par">“To let go a flea is a more virtuous act than to
give a dirham to a beggar.”—Abu’l-Ala.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2431"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"><a href="#s93" class="pginternal">XCIII</a> and <a href="#s94" class="pginternal">XCIV</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">Omar too, in the 157th quatrain of
Heron-Allen’s—</p>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“Had I charge of the matter I would not have
come,</p>
<p class="line">And likewise could I control my going, where could I
go?”</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2445"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s95" class="pginternal">XCV</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">“Thy two soul-devouring angels,” the
angels of death and resurrection. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e2451" id="xd21e2451" class="pginternal">103</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2453"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s96" class="pginternal">XCVI</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">“Nubakht,” one of the opponents of the
Prophet Mohammed.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2459"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s103" class="pginternal">CIII</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">“Rabbi,” my lord God.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2465"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s104" class="pginternal">CIV</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">“And like the dead of Ind,” referring
to the practice of the Hindus who burn their dead.</p>
<p class="par">“Munker” and “Nakir,” the two
angels who on the Day of Judgment open the graves of the dead and
cross-examine them—the process is said to be very cruel—as
to their faith. Whosoever is found wanting in this is pushed back into
the grave and thence thrown into Juhannam. No wonder Abu’l-Ala
prefers cremation.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2473"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s105" class="pginternal">CV</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">He wrote his own epitaph, which is:</p>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“This wrong to me was by my father done,</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">But never by me to any one.”</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2484"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s106" class="pginternal">CVI</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">“Izrail,” the angel of death.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2490"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"><a href="#s115" class="pginternal">CXV</a>, <a href="#s116" class="pginternal">CXVI</a> and
<a href="#s117" class="pginternal">CXVII</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">These will suggest to the reader
Shakespeare’s lines:</p>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“Imperial <span class="corr" title="Source: Ceasar" id="xd21e2505">Caesar</span>, dead and turned to clay,</p>
<p class="line">Might stop a hole to keep the wind away;</p>
<p class="line">O, that that earth, which kept the world in awe,</p>
<p class="line">Should stop a wall t’expel the winter’s
flaw.”</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e2514" id="xd21e2514" class="pginternal">104</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div2 section" id="xd21e2515"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h3 class="main"> <a href="#s118" class="pginternal">CXVIII</a></h3>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">Compare this with Omar’s:</p>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">“Thou hast no power over the morrow,</p>
<p class="line">And anxiety about the morrow is useless to thee:</p>
<p class="line xd21e202">Waste not thou the moment, if thy heart is not
mad,</p>
<p class="line">For the value of the remainder of thy life is not
certain.”</p>
</div>
<p><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e2530" id="xd21e2530" class="pginternal">105</a>]</span></p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="div1 review" id="reviews"><span class="pagenum">[<a href="#toc" class="pginternal">Contents</a>]</span>
<div class="divHead">
<h2 class="main">PRESS AND PERSONAL NOTICES</h2>
</div>
<div class="divBody">
<p class="par first">Mr. Rihani’s book is soundly workmanlike,
with adequate scholarship, and is often very felicitous. He has done a
real service to modern understanding of an important though slightly
known literature in presenting these selections with sufficient
annotation.—New York Evening Sun.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p class="par"/>
<p class="par">The Luzumiyat. By Abu’l-Ala. Born in Syria, in the
tenth century A. D., this poet, scholar, teacher, philosopher and
pessimist became known as “the Voltaire of the East,” and
may well be read for the beauty of his work, even if there is little
agreement with his general ideas of life.—The Christian
Century.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p class="par"/>
<p class="par">Abu’l-Ala is a true poet, with a philosophy much
nobler than Omar’s, and Mr. Rihani’s translation has rare
poetic qualities.—Edwin Markham.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p class="par"/>
<div class="lgouter">
<p class="line">If I had but a garden for a bower</p>
<p class="line">Wherein the roses of Damascus flower,</p>
<p class="line">How happy, with the Luzumiyat in hand,</p>
<p class="line">To pass the afternoon and sunset hour!</p>
</div>
<p class="par first signed">Clinton Scollard. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e2557" id="xd21e2557" class="pginternal">106</a>]</span></p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p class="par"/>
<p class="par">“The Luzumiyat” of Abu’l-Ala, as
rendered into English by Mr. Ameen Rihani, is more than a mere
translation—it is excellent poetry. Aside from its interest as a
literary curiosity, it possesses intrinsic value as literature of a
high quality. The historical matter contained in the preface of the
book, as well as the notes following the preface, will appeal to the
scholar who makes a study of the best expressions of Oriental
thought.—James B. Kenyon.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p class="par"/>
<p class="par">The first English rendition of the Luzumiyat of
Abu’l-Ala, comes from Ameen Rihani, the author of the Book of
Khaled, who has selected the quatrains from three volumes of the works
of the Syrian poet. For those who cling to a childish haze concerning
Assyrians and Syrians, we would add that while the Assyrian comes down
like a wolf on the fold, the Syrian, at least this particular one, has
a tread like Omar Khayyam. Therein lies the chief interest of the
Luzumiyat, unfair as it may be, in view of the fact that
Abu’l-Ala died at about the time Omar was born. So marked and
far-reaching is the resemblance, that we might almost bring ourselves
to the belief that in Omar Khayyam was recreated the soul of
Abu’l-Ala, with subtle changes, notable among them the casting
off of the tenets of prohibition, and a substitution of fatalism for
stoicism.—The Sun (New York). <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e2567" id="xd21e2567" class="pginternal">107</a>]</span></p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p class="par"/>
<p class="par">What Fitzgerald did for the Man of Neishapur in his
wonderful version of the Rubaiyat, Mr. Rihani has done, in scarcely
inferior measure, for his own remote ancestor Abu’l-Ala. Mr.
Rihani, who is a poet and essayist in English as well as in Arabic, has
made a permanent addition to Literature. The Luzumiyat can not be
displaced.—Michael Monahan.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p class="par"/>
<p class="par">Mr. Rihani has rendered valuable service to Literature
in making the career of “The Lucretius of Islam,” as he
happily calls him, known to the general reader in the English-speaking
world.... The similarity of the Luzumiyat to Omar Khayyam under certain
aspects, should win for Rihani’s brilliant rendering a generous
measure of recognition. As it is, the rare merits of the book, the
critical power of the preface, the skill and sincere feeling exhibited
in the verse, and the wide knowledge of English Literature shown in the
notes, make it, to my mind, a little masterpiece.—Percy
White.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p class="par"/>
<p class="par">The similarity in some parts of the Luzumiyat to Omar
Khayyam is striking. But Abu’l-Ala, to my mind, is a greater
poet, and he is at times so remarkably modern. I am glad to make his
acquaintance through your excellent translation.—R. B.
Cunninghame Graham. <span class="pagenum">[<a href="#xd21e2581" id="xd21e2581" class="pginternal">108</a>]</span></p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p class="par"/>
<p class="par">There is a compelling power in his attack on hypocrisy
and quackery, in his recognition of the supremacy of reason and the
human soul. Those who still fondly turn to the “Rubaiyat”
for enjoyment will surely find stimulus, too, and pleasure in these
ruthless rhymes.—Asia.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body></html>
