<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Luzumiyat</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter">
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">I</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">The sable wings of Night pursuing day</p>
				<p class="line">Across the opalescent hills, display</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">The wondrous star-gems which the fiery suns</p>
				<p class="line">Are scattering upon their fiery way.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">II</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">O my Companion, Night is passing fair,</p>
				<p class="line">Fairer than aught the dawn and sundown wear;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">And fairer, too, than all the gilded days</p>
				<p class="line">Of blond Illusion and its golden snare.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">III</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Hark, in the minarets muazzens call</p>
				<p class="line">The evening hour that in the interval</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Of darkness Ahmad might remembered be,—</p>
				<p class="line">Remembered of the Darkness be they all.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-4" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">IV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And hear the others who with cymbals try</p>
				<p class="line">To stay the feet of every passer-by:</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">The market-men along the darkling lane</p>
				<p class="line">Are crying up their wares.—Oh! let them cry<span class="corr" id="xd21e673" title="Source: ,">.</span></p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-5" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">V</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Mohammed or Messiah! Hear thou me,</p>
				<p class="line">The truth entire nor here nor there can be;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">How should our God who made the sun and moon</p>
				<p class="line">Give all his light to One, I cannot see.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-6" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">VI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Come, let us with the naked Night now rest</p>
				<p class="line">And read in Allah’s Book the sonnet best:</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">The Pleiads—ah, the Moon from them departs,—</p>
				<p class="line">She draws her veil and hastens toward the west.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-7" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">VII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">The Pleiads follow; and our Ethiop Queen,</p>
				<p class="line">Emerging from behind her starry screen,</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Will steep her tresses in the saffron dye</p>
				<p class="line">Of dawn, and vanish in the morning sheen.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-8" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">VIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">The secret of the day and night is in</p>
				<p class="line">The constellations, which forever spin</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Around each other in the comet-dust;—</p>
				<p class="line">The comet-dust and humankind are kin.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-9" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">IX</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">But whether of dust or fire or foam, the glaive</p>
				<p class="line">Of Allah cleaves the planet and the wave</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Of this mysterious Heaven-Sea of life,</p>
				<p class="line">And lo! we have the Cradle of the Grave.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-10" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">X</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">The Grave and Cradle, the untiring twain,</p>
				<p class="line">Who in the markets of this narrow lane</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Bordered of darkness, ever give and take</p>
				<p class="line">In equal measure—what’s the loss or gain?</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-11" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Ay, like the circles which the sun doth spin</p>
				<p class="line">Of gossamer, we end as we begin;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Our feet are on the heads of those that pass,</p>
				<p class="line">But ever their Graves around our Cradles grin.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-12" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And what avails it then that Man be born</p>
				<p class="line">To joy or sorrow?—why rejoice or mourn?</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">The doling doves are calling to the rose;</p>
				<p class="line">The dying rose is bleeding o’er the thorn.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-13" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And he the Messenger, who takes away</p>
				<p class="line">The faded garments, purple, white, and gray</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Of all our dreams unto the Dyer, will</p>
				<p class="line">Bring back new robes to-morrow—so they say.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-14" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XIV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">But now the funeral is passing by,</p>
				<p class="line">And in its trail, beneath this moaning sky,</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">The howdaj comes,—both vanish into night;</p>
				<p class="line">To me are one, the sob, the joyous cry.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-15" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">With tombs and ruined temples groans the land</p>
				<p class="line">In which our forbears in the drifting sand</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Arise as dunes upon the track of Time</p>
				<p class="line">To mark the cycles of the moving hand</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-16" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XVI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Of Fate. Alas! and we shall follow soon</p>
				<p class="line">Into the night eternal or the noon;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">The wayward daughters of the spheres return</p>
				<p class="line">Unto the bosom of their sun or moon.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-17" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XVII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And from the last days of Thamud and ‘Ad</p>
				<p class="line">Up to the first of Hashem’s fearless lad,</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Who smashed the idols of his mighty tribe,</p>
				<p class="line">What idols and what heroes Death has had!</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-18" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XVIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Tread lightly, for the mighty that have been</p>
				<p class="line">Might now be breathing in the dust unseen;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Lightly, the violets beneath thy feet</p>
				<p class="line">Spring from the mole of some Arabian queen.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-19" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XIX</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Many a grave embraces friend and foe</p>
				<p class="line">Behind the curtain of this sorry show</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Of love and hate inscrutable; alas!</p>
				<p class="line">The Fates will always reap the while they sow.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-20" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XX</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">The silken fibre of the fell Zakkum,</p>
				<p class="line">As warp and woof, is woven on the loom</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Of life into a tapestry of dreams</p>
				<p class="line">To decorate the chariot-seat of Doom.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-21" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XXI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And still we weave, and still we are content</p>
				<p class="line">In slaving for the sovereigns who have spent</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">The savings of the toiling of the mind</p>
				<p class="line">Upon the glory of Dismemberment.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-22" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XXII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Nor king nor slave the hungry Days will spare;</p>
				<p class="line">Between their fangéd Hours alike we fare:</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Anon they bound upon us while we play</p>
				<p class="line">Unheeding at the threshold of their Lair.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-23" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XXIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Then Jannat or Juhannam? From the height</p>
				<p class="line">Of reason I can see nor fire nor light</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">That feeds not on the darknesses; we pass</p>
				<p class="line">From world to world, like shadows through the night.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-24" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XXIV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Or sleep—and shall it be eternal sleep</p>
				<p class="line">Somewhither in the bosom of the deep</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Infinities of cosmic dust, or here</p>
				<p class="line">Where gracile cypresses the vigil keep!</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-25" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XXV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Upon the threshing-floor of life I burn</p>
				<p class="line">Beside the Winnower a word to learn;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">And only this: Man’s of the soil and sun,</p>
				<p class="line">And to the soil and sun he shall return.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-26" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XXVI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And like a spider’s house or sparrow’s nest,</p>
				<p class="line">The Sultan’s palace, though upon the crest</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Of glory’s mountain, soon or late must go:</p>
				<p class="line">Ay, all abodes to ruin are addrest.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-27" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XXVII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">So, too, the creeds of Man: the one prevails</p>
				<p class="line">Until the other comes; and this one fails</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">When that one triumphs; ay, the lonesome world</p>
				<p class="line">Will always want the latest fairy-tales.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-28" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XXVIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Seek not the Tavern of Belief, my friend,</p>
				<p class="line">Until the Sakis there their morals mend;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">A lie imbibed a thousand lies will breed,</p>
				<p class="line">And thou’lt become a Saki in the end.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-29" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XXIX</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">By fearing whom I trust I find my way</p>
				<p class="line">To truth; by trusting wholly I betray</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">The trust of wisdom; better far is doubt</p>
				<p class="line">Which brings the false into the light of day.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-30" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XXX</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Or wilt thou commerce have with those who make</p>
				<p class="line">Rugs of the rainbow, rainbows of the snake,</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Snakes of a staff, and other wondrous things?—</p>
				<p class="line">The burning thirst a mirage can not slake.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-31" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XXXI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Religion is a maiden veiled in prayer,</p>
				<p class="line">Whose bridal gifts and dowry those who care</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Can buy in Mutakallem’s shop of words</p>
				<p class="line">But I for such, a dirham can not spare.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-32" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XXXII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Why linger here, why turn another page?</p>
				<p class="line">Oh! seal with doubt the whole book of the age;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Doubt every one, even him, the seeming slave</p>
				<p class="line">Of righteousness, and doubt the canting sage.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-33" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XXXIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Some day the weeping daughters of Hadil</p>
				<p class="line">Will say unto the bulbuls: “Let’s appeal</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">To Allah in behalf of Brother Man</p>
				<p class="line">Who’s at the mercy now of Ababil.”</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-34" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XXXIV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Of Ababil! I would the tale were true,—</p>
				<p class="line">Would all the birds were such winged furies too;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">The scourging and the purging were a boon</p>
				<p class="line">For me, O my dear Brothers, and for you.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-35" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XXXV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Methinks Allah divides me to complete</p>
				<p class="line">His problem, which with Xs is replete;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">For I am free and I am too in chains</p>
				<p class="line">Groping along the labyrinthine street.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-36" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XXXVI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And round the Well how oft my Soul doth grope</p>
				<p class="line">Athirst; but lo! my Bucket hath no Rope:</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">I cry for water, and the deep, dark Well</p>
				<p class="line">Echoes my wailing cry, but not my hope.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-37" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XXXVII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Ah, many have I seen of those who fell</p>
				<p class="line">While drawing, with a swagger, from the Well;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">They came with Rope and Bucket, and they went</p>
				<p class="line">Empty of hand another tale to tell.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-38" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XXXVIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">The <i>I</i> in me standing upon the brink</p>
				<p class="line">Would leap into the Well to get a drink;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">But how to rise once in the depth, I cry,</p>
				<p class="line">And cowardly behind my logic slink.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-39" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XXXIX</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And she: “How long must I the burden bear?</p>
				<p class="line">How long this tattered garment must I wear?”</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">And I: “Why wear it? Leave it here, and go</p>
				<p class="line">Away without it—little do I care.”</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-40" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XL</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">But once when we were quarreling, the door</p>
				<p class="line">Was opened by a Visitor who bore</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Both Rope and Pail; he offered them and said:</p>
				<p class="line">“Drink, if you will, but once, and nevermore.”</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-41" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XLI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">One draught, more bitter than the Zakkum tree,</p>
				<p class="line">Brought us unto the land of mystery</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Where rising Sand and Dust and Flame conceal</p>
				<p class="line">The door of every Caravanseri.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-42" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XLII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">We reach a door and there the legend find.</p>
				<p class="line">“To all the Pilgrims of the Human Mind:</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Knock and pass on!” We knock and knock and knock;</p>
				<p class="line">But no one answers save the moaning wind<span class="corr" id="xd21e1156" title="Not in source">.</span></p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-43" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XLIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">How like a door the knowledge we attain,</p>
				<p class="line">Which door is on the bourne of the Inane;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">It opens and our nothingness is closed,—</p>
				<p class="line">It closes and in darkness we remain.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-44" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XLIV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Hither we come unknowing, hence we go;</p>
				<p class="line">Unknowing we are messaged to and fro;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">And yet we think we know all things of earth</p>
				<p class="line">And sky—the suns and stars we think we know.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-45" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XLV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Apply thy wit, O Brother, here and there</p>
				<p class="line">Upon this and upon that; but beware</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Lest in the end—ah, better at the start</p>
				<p class="line">Go to the Tinker for a slight repair.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-46" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XLVI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And why so much ado, and wherefore lay</p>
				<p class="line">The burden of the years upon the day</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Of thy vain dreams? Who polishes his sword</p>
				<p class="line">Morning and eve will polish it away.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-47" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XLVII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">I heard it whispered in the cryptic streets</p>
				<p class="line">Where every sage the same dumb shadow meets:</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">“We are but words fallen from the lipe of Time</p>
				<p class="line">Which God, that we might understand, repeats.”</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-48" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XLVIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Another said: “The creeping worm hath shown,</p>
				<p class="line">In her discourse on human flesh and bone,</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">That Man was once the bed on which she slept—</p>
				<p class="line">The walking dust was once a thing of stone.”</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-49" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XLIX</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And still another: “We are coins which fade</p>
				<p class="line">In circulation, coins which Allah made</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">To cheat Iblis: the good and bad alike</p>
				<p class="line">Are spent by Fate upon a passing shade.”</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-50" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">L</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And in the pottery the potter cried,</p>
				<p class="line">As on his work shone all the master’s pride—</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">“How is it, Rabbi, I, thy slave, can make</p>
				<p class="line">Such vessels as nobody dare deride?”</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-51" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">The Earth then spake: “My children silent be;</p>
				<p class="line">Same are to God the camel and the flea:</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">He makes a mess of me to nourish you,</p>
				<p class="line">Then makes a mess of you to nourish me.”</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-52" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Now, I believe the Potter will essay</p>
				<p class="line">Once more the Wheel, and from a better clay</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Will make a better Vessel, and perchance</p>
				<p class="line">A masterpiece which will endure for aye.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-53" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">With better skill he even will remould</p>
				<p class="line">The scattered potsherds of the New and Old;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Then you and I will not disdain to buy,</p>
				<p class="line">Though in the mart of Iblis they be sold.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-54" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LIV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Sooth I have told the masters of the mart</p>
				<p class="line">Of rusty creeds and Babylonian art</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Of magic. Now the truth about myself—</p>
				<p class="line">Here is the secret of my wincing heart.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-55" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">I muse, but in my musings I recall</p>
				<p class="line">The days of my iniquity; we’re all—</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">An arrow shot across the wilderness,</p>
				<p class="line">Somewhither, in the wilderness must fall.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-56" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LVI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">I laugh, but in my laughter-cup I pour</p>
				<p class="line">The tears of scorn and melancholy sore;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">I who am shattered by the hand of Doubt,</p>
				<p class="line">Like glass to be remoulded nevermore.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-57" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LVII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">I wheedle, too, even like my slave Zeidun,</p>
				<p class="line">Who robs at dawn his brother, and at noon</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Prostrates himself in prayer—ah, let us pray</p>
				<p class="line">That Night might blot us and our sins, and soon.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-58" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LVIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">But in the fatal coils, without intent,</p>
				<p class="line">We sin; wherefore a future punishment?</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">They say the metal dead a deadly steel</p>
				<p class="line">Becomes with Allah’s knowledge and consent.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-59" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LIX</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And even the repentant sinner’s tear</p>
				<p class="line">Falling into Juhannam’s very ear,</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Goes to its heart, extinguishes its fire</p>
				<p class="line">For ever and forever,—so I hear.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-60" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LX</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Between the white and purple Words of Time</p>
				<p class="line">In motley garb with Destiny I rhyme:</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">The colored glasses to the water give</p>
				<p class="line">The colors of a symbolry sublime.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-61" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">How oft, when young, my brothers I would shun</p>
				<p class="line">If their religious feelings were not spun</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Of my own cobweb, which I find was but</p>
				<p class="line">A spider’s revelation of the sun.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-62" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Now, mosques and churches—even a Kaaba Stone,</p>
				<p class="line">Korans and Bibles—even a martyr’s bone,—</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">All these and more my heart can tolerate,</p>
				<p class="line">For my religion’s love, and love alone.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-63" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">To humankind, O Brother, consecrate</p>
				<p class="line">Thy heart, and shun the hundred Sects that prate</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">About the things they little know about—</p>
				<p class="line">Let all receive thy pity, none thy hate.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-64" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXIV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">The tavern and the temple also shun,</p>
				<p class="line">For sheikh and libertine in sooth are one;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">And when the pious knave begins to pule,</p>
				<p class="line">The knave in purple breaks his vow anon.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-65" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">“The wine’s forbidden,” say these honest folk,</p>
				<p class="line">But for themselves the law they will revoke;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">The snivelling sheikh says he’s without a garb,</p>
				<p class="line">When in the tap-house he had pawned his cloak<span class="corr" id="xd21e1449" title="Source: ,">.</span></p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-66" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXVI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Or in the house of lust. The priestly name</p>
				<p class="line">And priestly turban once were those of Shame—</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">And Shame is preaching in the pulpit now—</p>
				<p class="line">If pulpits tumble down, I’m not to blame.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-67" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXVII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">For after she declaims upon the vows</p>
				<p class="line">Of Faith, she pusillanimously bows</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Before the Sultan’s wine-empurpled throne,</p>
				<p class="line">While he and all his courtezans carouse.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-68" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXVIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Carouse, ye sovereign lords! The wheel will roll</p>
				<p class="line">Forever to confound and to console:</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Who sips to-day the golden cup will drink</p>
				<p class="line">Mayhap to-morrow in a wooden bowl—</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-69" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXIX</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And silent drink. The tumult of our mirth</p>
				<p class="line">Is worse than our mad welcoming of birth:—</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">The thunder hath a grandeur, but the rains,</p>
				<p class="line">Without the thunder, quench the thirst of Earth.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-70" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXX</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">The Prophets, too, among us come to teach,</p>
				<p class="line">Are one with those who from the pulpit preach;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">They pray, and slay, and pass away, and yet</p>
				<p class="line">Our ills are as the pebbles on the beach.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-71" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXXI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And though around the temple they should run</p>
				<p class="line">For seventy times and seven, and in the sun</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Of mad devotion drool, their prayers are still</p>
				<p class="line">Like their desires of feasting-fancies spun.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-72" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXXII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Oh! let them in the marshes grope, or ride</p>
				<p class="line">Their jaded Myths along the mountain-side;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Come up with me, O Brother, to the heights</p>
				<p class="line">Where Reason is the prophet and the guide.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-73" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXXIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">“What is thy faith and creed,” they ask of me,</p>
				<p class="line">“And who art thou? Unseal thy pedigree.”—</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">I am the child of Time, my tribe, mankind,</p>
				<p class="line">And now this world’s my caravanseri.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-74" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXXIV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Swathe thee in wool, my Sufi friend, and go</p>
				<p class="line">Thy way; in cotton I the wiser grow;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">But we ourselves are shreds of earth, and soon</p>
				<p class="line">The Tailor of the Universe will sew.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-75" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXXV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Ay! suddenly the mystic Hand will seal</p>
				<p class="line">The saint’s devotion and the sinner’s weal;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">They worship Saturn, but I worship One</p>
				<p class="line">Before whom Saturn and the Heavens kneel.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-76" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXXVI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Among the crumbling ruins of the creeds</p>
				<p class="line">The Scout upon his camel played his reeds</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">And called out to his people,—“Let us hence!</p>
				<p class="line">The pasture here is full of noxious weeds.”</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-77" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXXVII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Among us falsehood is proclaimed aloud,</p>
				<p class="line">But truth is whispered to the phantom bowed</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Of conscience; ay! and Wrong is ever crowned,</p>
				<p class="line">While Right and Reason are denied a shroud.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-78" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXXVIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And why in this dark Kingdom tribute pay?</p>
				<p class="line">With clamant multitudes why stop to pray?</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Oh! hear the inner Voice:—“If thou’lt be right,</p>
				<p class="line">Do what they deem is wrong, and go thy way.”</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-79" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXXIX</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Thy way unto the Sun the spaces through</p>
				<p class="line">Where king Orion’s black-eyed huris slew</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">The Mother of Night to guide the Wings that bear</p>
				<p class="line">The flame divine hid in a drop of dew.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-80" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXXX</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Hear ye who in the dust of ages creep,</p>
				<p class="line">And in the halls of wicked masters sleep:—</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Arise! and out of this wan weariness</p>
				<p class="line">Where Allah’s laughter makes the Devil weep.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-81" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXXXI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Arise! for lo! the Laughter and the Weeping</p>
				<p class="line">Reveal the Weapon which the Master’s keeping</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Above your heads; Oh! take it up and strike!</p>
				<p class="line">The lion of tyranny is only sleeping.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-82" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXXXII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Evil and Virtue? Shadows on the street</p>
				<p class="line">Of Fate and Vanity,—but shadows meet</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">When in the gloaming they are hast’ning forth</p>
				<p class="line">To drink with Night annihilation sweet.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-83" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXXXIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And thus the Sun will write and will efface</p>
				<p class="line">The mystic symbols which the sages trace</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">In vain, for all the worlds of God are stored</p>
				<p class="line">In his enduring vessels Time and Space.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-84" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXXXIV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">For all my learning’s but a veil, I guess,</p>
				<p class="line">Veiling the phantom of my nothingness;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Howbeit, there are those who think me wise,</p>
				<p class="line">And those who think me—even these I bless.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-85" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXXXV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And all my years, as vapid as my lay,</p>
				<p class="line">Are bitter morsels of a mystic day,—</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">The day of Fate, who carries in his lap</p>
				<p class="line">December snows and snow-white flowers of May.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-86" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXXXVI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Allah, my sleep is woven through, it seems,</p>
				<p class="line">With burning threads of night and golden beams;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">But when my dreams are evil they come true;</p>
				<p class="line">When they are not, they are, alas! but dreams.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-87" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXXXVII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">The subtle ways of Destiny I know;</p>
				<p class="line">In me she plays her game of “Give and Go.”</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Misfortune I receive in cash, but joy,</p>
				<p class="line">In drafts on Heaven or on the winds that blow.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-88" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXXXVIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">I give and go, grim Destiny,—I play</p>
				<p class="line">Upon this checker-board of Night and Day</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">The dark game with thee, but the day will come</p>
				<p class="line">When one will turn the Board the other way.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-89" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">LXXXIX</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">If my house-swallow, laboring with zest,</p>
				<p class="line">Felt like myself the burden of unrest,</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Unlightened by inscrutable designs,</p>
				<p class="line">She would not build her young that cozy nest.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-90" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XC</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Thy life with guiltless life-blood do not stain—</p>
				<p class="line">Hunt not the children of the woods; in vain</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Thou’lt try one day to wash thy bloody hand:</p>
				<p class="line">Nor hunter here nor hunted long remain<span class="corr" id="xd21e1765" title="Not in source">.</span></p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-91" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XCI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Oh! cast my dust away from thee, and doff</p>
				<p class="line">Thy cloak of sycophancy and like stuff:</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">I’m but a shadow on the sandy waste,—</p>
				<p class="line">Enough of thy duplicity, enough!</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-92" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XCII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Behold! the Veil that hid thy soul is torn</p>
				<p class="line">And all thy secrets on the winds are borne:</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">The hand of Sin has written on thy face</p>
				<p class="line">“Awake, for these untimely furrows warn!”</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-93" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XCIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">A prince of souls, ‘tis sung in ancient lay,</p>
				<p class="line">One morning sought a vesture of the clay;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">He came into the Pottery, the fool—</p>
				<p class="line">The lucky fool was warned to stay away.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-94" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XCIV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">But I was not. Oh! that the Fates decree</p>
				<p class="line">That I now cast aside this clay of me;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">My soul and body wedded for a while</p>
				<p class="line">Are sick and would that separation be.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-95" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XCV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">“Thou shalt not kill!”—Thy words, O God, we heed,</p>
				<p class="line">Though thy two Soul-devouring Angels feed</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Thy Promise of another life on this,—</p>
				<p class="line">To have spared us both, it were a boon indeed.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-96" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XCVI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Oh! that some one would but return to tell</p>
				<p class="line">If old Nubakht is burning now in hell,</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Or if the workers for the Prophet’s prize</p>
				<p class="line">Are laughing at his Paradisal sell.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-97" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XCVII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Once I have tried to string a few Pearl-seeds</p>
				<p class="line">Upon my Rosary of wooden beads;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">But I have searched, and I have searched in vain</p>
				<p class="line">For pearls in all the caverns of the creeds</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-98" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XCVIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And in the palaces of wealth I found</p>
				<p class="line">Some beads of wisdom scattered on the ground,</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Around the throne of Power, beneath the feet</p>
				<p class="line">Of fair-faced slaves with flowers of folly crowned.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-99" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">XCIX</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Thy wealth can shed no tears around thy bier,</p>
				<p class="line">Nor can it wash thy hands of shame and fear;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Ere thou departest with it freely part<span class="corr" id="xd21e1879" title="Source: .">,</span>—</p>
				<p class="line">Let others plead for thee and God will hear.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-100" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">C</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">For me thy silks and feathers have no charm</p>
				<p class="line">The pillow I like best is my right arm;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">The comforts of this passing show I spurn,</p>
				<p class="line">For Poverty can do the soul no harm.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-101" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">The guiding hand of Allah I can see</p>
				<p class="line">Upon my staff: of what use then is he</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Who’d be the blind man’s guide? Thou silent oak,</p>
				<p class="line">No son of Eve shall walk with me and thee.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-102" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">My life’s the road on which I blindly speed:</p>
				<p class="line">My goal’s the grave on which I plant a reed</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">To shape my Hope, but soon the Hand unseen</p>
				<p class="line">Will strike, and lo! I’m but a sapless weed.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-103" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">O Rabbi, curse us not if we have been</p>
				<p class="line">Nursed in the shadow of the Gate of Sin</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Built by thy hand—yea, ev’n thine angels blink</p>
				<p class="line">When we are coming out and going in.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-104" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CIV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And like the dead of Ind I do not fear</p>
				<p class="line">To go to thee in flames; the most austere</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Angel of fire a softer tooth and tongue</p>
				<p class="line">Hath he than dreadful Munker and Nakir.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-105" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Now, at this end of Adam’s line I stand</p>
				<p class="line">Holding my father’s life-curse in my hand,</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Doing no one the wrong that he did me:—</p>
				<p class="line">Ah, would that he were barren as the sand!</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-106" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CVI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Ay, thus thy children, though they sovereigns be,</p>
				<p class="line">When truth upon them dawns, will turn on thee,</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Who cast them into life’s dark labyrinth</p>
				<p class="line">Where even old Izrail can not see.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-107" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CVII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">And in the labyrinth both son and sire</p>
				<p class="line">Awhile will fan and fuel hatred’s fire;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Sparks of the log of evil are all men</p>
				<p class="line">Allwhere—extinguished be the race entire!</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-108" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CVIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">If miracles were wrought in ancient years,</p>
				<p class="line">Why not to-day, O Heaven-cradled seers?</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">The highway’s strewn with dead, the lepers weep,</p>
				<p class="line">If ye but knew,—if ye but saw their tears!</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-109" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CIX</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Fan thou a lisping fire and it will leap</p>
				<p class="line">In flames, but dost thou fan an ashy heap?</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">They would respond, indeed, whom thou dost call,</p>
				<p class="line">Were they not dead, alas! or dead asleep.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-110" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CX</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">The way of vice is open as the sky,</p>
				<p class="line">The way of virtue’s like the needle’s eye;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">But whether here or there, the eager Soul</p>
				<p class="line">Has only two Companions—Whence and Why.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-111" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CXI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Whence come, O firmament, thy myriad lights?</p>
				<p class="line">Whence comes thy sap, O vineyard of the heights?</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Whence comes the perfume of the rose, and whence</p>
				<p class="line">The spirit-larva which the body blights?</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-112" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CXII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Whence does the nettle get its bitter sting?</p>
				<p class="line">Whence do the honey bees their honey bring?</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Whence our Companions, too—our Whence and Why?</p>
				<p class="line">O Soul, I do not know a single thing!</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-113" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CXIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">How many like us in the ages past</p>
				<p class="line">Have blindly soared, though like a pebble cast,</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Seeking the veil of mystery to tear,</p>
				<p class="line">But fell accurst beneath the burning blast?</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-114" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CXIV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Why try to con the book of earth and sky,</p>
				<p class="line">Why seek the truth which neither you nor I</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Can grasp? But Death methinks the secret keeps,</p>
				<p class="line">And will impart it to us by and by.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-115" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CXV</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">The Sultan, too, relinquishing his throne</p>
				<p class="line">Must wayfare through the darkening dust alone</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Where neither crown nor kingdom be, and he,</p>
				<p class="line">Part of the Secret, here and there is blown.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-116" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CXVI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">To clay the mighty Sultan must return</p>
				<p class="line">And, chancing, help a praying slave to burn</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">His midnight oil before the face of Him,</p>
				<p class="line">Who of the Sultan makes an incense urn.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-117" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CXVII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Turned to a cup, who once the sword of state</p>
				<p class="line">Held o’er the head of slave and potentate,</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Is now held in the tippler’s trembling hand,</p>
				<p class="line">Or smashed upon the tavern-floor of Fate.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-118" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CXVIII</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">For this I say, Be watchful of the Cage</p>
				<p class="line">Of chance; it opes alike to fool and sage;</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Spy on the moment, for to-morrow’ll be,</p>
				<p class="line">Like yesterday, an obliterated page.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-119" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CXIX</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Yea, kiss the rosy cheeks of new-born Day,</p>
				<p class="line">And hail eternity in every ray</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Forming a halo round its infant head,</p>
				<p class="line">Illumining thy labyrinthine way.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-120" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CXX</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">But I, the thrice-imprisoned, try to troll</p>
				<p class="line">Strains of the song of night, which fill with dole</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">My blindness, my confinement, and my flesh—</p>
				<p class="line">The sordid habitation of my soul.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
		<article id="the-luzumiyat-121" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h3 class="main">CXXI</h3>
			<div class="lgouter">
				<p class="line">Howbeit, my inner vision heir shall be</p>
				<p class="line">To the increasing flames of mystery</p>
				<p class="line xd21e202">Which may illumine yet my prisons all,</p>
				<p class="line">And crown the ever living hope of me.</p>
			</div>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
