<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>To Abu al-ʻAlaʼ</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter">
		<section id="to-abu-al-ala" epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Abu al-ʻAlaʼ</h2>
			<p>
				<span>In thy fountained peristyles of Reason</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Glows the light and flame of desert noons;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the cloister of thy pensive Fancy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Wisdom burns the spikenard of her moons.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Closed by Fate the portals of the dwelling</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of thy sight, the light thus inward flowed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the shoulders of the crouching Darkness</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thou hast risen to the highest road.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I have seen thee walking with Canopus</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Through the stellar spaces of the night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have heard thee asking thy Companion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">“Where be now my staff, and where thy light?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Abu al-ʻAlaʼ, in the heaving darkness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Didst thou not the whisperings hear of me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy star-lit wilderness, my Brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Didst thou not a burdened shadow see?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I have walked and I have slept beside thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">I have laughed and I have wept as well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have heard the voices of thy silence</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Melting in thy Jannat and thy hell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I remember, too, that once the <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Saki</i></span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Filled the antique cup and gave it thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, filled with the treasures of thy wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Thou dost pass that very cup to me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By the God of thee, my Syrian Brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Which is best, the <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Saki</i>’s cup or thine?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which the mystery divine uncovers⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">If the cover covers aught divine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And if it lies hid in the soul of silence</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Like incense in the dust of ambergris,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wouldst thou burn it to perfume the terror</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of the caverns of the dried-up seas?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where’er it be, Oh! let it be, my Brother.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Though “thrice-imprisoned,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> thou hast forged us more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Solid weapons for the life-long battle</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Than all the Heaven-taught Armorers of yore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thrice-imprisoned,” thou wert e’en as mighty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In the boundless kingdom of the mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the whirlwind that compels the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As the thunder that compels the wind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thrice-imprisoned,” thou wert freer truly</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Than the liegeless Arab on his mare⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freer than the bearers of the sceptre⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Freer than the winged lords of the air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thrice-imprisoned,” thou hast sung of freedom</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As but a few of all her heroes can;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast undermined the triple prison</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of the mind and heart and soul of man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In thy fountained peristyles of Reason</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Glows the light and flame of desert noons;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the cloister of thy pensive Fancy</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Wisdom burns the spikenard of her moons.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">Ameen Rihani.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
